1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2007;595:1-75. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-46401-5_1.

Curcumin: the Indian solid gold.

Aggarwal BB(1), Sundaram C, Malani N, Ichikawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. aggarwal@mdanderson.org

Turmeric, derived from the plant Curcuma longa, is a gold-colored spice commonly 
used in the Indian subcontinent, not only for health care but also for the 
preservation of food and as a yellow dye for textiles. Curcumin, which gives the 
yellow color to turmeric, was first isolated almost two centuries ago, and its 
structure as diferuloylmethane was determined in 1910. Since the time of 
Ayurveda (1900 Bc) numerous therapeutic activities have been assigned to 
turmeric for a wide variety of diseases and conditions, including those of the 
skin, pulmonary, and gastrointestinal systems, aches, pains, wounds, sprains, 
and liver disorders. Extensive research within the last half century has proven 
that most of these activities, once associated with turmeric, are due to 
curcumin. Curcumin has been shown to exhibit antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, 
antiviral, antibacterial, antifungal, and anticancer activities and thus has a 
potential against various malignant diseases, diabetes, allergies, arthritis, 
Alzheimer's disease, and other chronic illnesses. These effects are mediated 
through the regulation of various transcription factors, growth factors, 
inflammatory cytokines, protein kinases, and other enzymes. Curcumin exhibits 
activities similar to recently discovered tumor necrosis factor blockers (e.g., 
HUMIRA, REMICADE, and ENBREL), a vascular endothelial cell growth factor blocker 
(e.g., AVASTIN), human epidermal growth factor receptor blockers (e.g., ERBITUX, 
ERLOTINIB, and GEFTINIB), and a HER2 blocker (e.g., HERCEPTIN). Considering the 
recent scientific bandwagon that multitargeted therapy is better than 
monotargeted therapy for most diseases, curcumin can be considered an ideal 
"Spice for Life".

DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-46401-5_1
PMID: 17569205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 2005 Apr;49(2):125-31.

Therapeutic uses of Ocimum sanctum Linn (Tulsi) with a note on eugenol and its 
pharmacological actions: a short review.

Prakash P(1), Gupta N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Seema Dental College & Hospital, Barrage Road, 
Rishikesh, Dehradoon - 249 203, Uttranchal.

The medicinal plants are widely used by the traditional medical practitioners 
for curing various diseases in their day to day practice. In traditional systems 
of medicine, different parts (leaves, stem, flower, root, seeds and even whole 
plant) of Ocimum sanctum Linn (known as Tulsi in Hindi), a small herb seen 
throughout India, have been recommended for the treatment of bronchitis, 
bronchial asthma, malaria, diarrhea, dysentery, skin diseases, arthritis, 
painful eye diseases, chronic fever, insect bite etc. The Ocimum sanctum L. has 
also been suggested to possess antifertility, anticancer, antidiabetic, 
antifungal, antimicrobial, hepatoprotective, cardioprotective, antiemetic, 
antispasmodic, analgesic, adaptogenic and diaphoretic actions. Eugenol 
(1-hydroxy-2-methoxy-4-allylbenzene), the active constituent present in Ocimum 
sanctum L., has been found to be largely responsible for the therapeutic 
potentials of Tulsi. Although because of its great therapeutic potentials and 
wide occurrence in India the practitioners of traditional systems of medicine 
have been using Ocimum sanctum L. for curing various ailments, a rational 
approach to this traditional medical practice with modern system of medicine is, 
however, not much available. In order to establish the therapeutic uses of 
Ocimum sanctum L. in modern medicine, in last few decades several Indian 
scientists and researchers have studied the pharmacological effects of steam 
distilled, petroleum ether and benzene extracts of various parts of Tulsi plant 
and eugenol on immune system, reproductive system, central nervous system, 
cardiovascular system, gastric system, urinary system and blood biochemistry and 
have described the therapeutic significance of Tulsi in management of various 
ailments. These pharmacological studies have established a scientific basis for 
therapeutic uses of this plant.

PMID: 16170979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Ethnopharmacol. 2019 Sep 15;241:111934. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.111934. Epub 
2019 May 23.

Traditional uses, secondary metabolites, and pharmacology of Celastrus species - 
a review.

Shen Y(1), Chen BL(1), Zhang QX(2), Zheng YZ(3), Fu Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Coarse Cereal Processing, Ministry of Agriculture Rural 
Affairs, College of Pharmacy and Biological Engineering, Chengdu University, 
Chengdu, 610106, China.
(2)School of Medical and Life Sciences, Chengdu University of TCM, Chengdu, 
610072, China.
(3)School of Food Engineering and Biotechnology, Hanshan Normal University, 
Chaozhou, 521041, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Coarse Cereal Processing, Ministry of Agriculture Rural 
Affairs, College of Pharmacy and Biological Engineering, Chengdu University, 
Chengdu, 610106, China. Electronic address: peter028@126.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Plants of genus Celastrus (Celastraceae) have 
been widely used in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) and Indian medicine to 
treat cognitive dysfunction, epilepsy, insomnia, rheumatism, gout, and dyspepsia 
for thousands of years.
AIM OF STUDY: We critically summarized the current evidence on the botanic 
characterization and distribution, ethnopharmacology, secondary metabolites, 
pharmacological activities, qualitative and quantitative analysis, and 
toxicology of Celastrus species to provide perspectives for developing more 
attractive pharmaceuticals of plant origin.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The relevant information on Celastrus species was 
gathered from worldwide accepted scientific databases via electronic search (Web 
of Science, SciFinder, PubMed, Elsevier, SpringerLink, Wiley Online, China 
Knowledge Resource Integrated, and Google Scholar). Information was also 
obtained from the literature and books as well as PhD and MSc dissertations. 
Plant names were validated by "The Plant List" (www.theplantlist.org).
RESULTS: Comprehensive analysis of the above mentioned databases and other 
sources confirmed that ethnomedical uses of plants of Celastrus genus had been 
recorded in China, India, and other countries in Southern Asia. The 
phytochemical investigation revealed the presence of β-dihydroagarofuranoids, 
diterpenoids, triterpenoids, tetraterpenes, phenylpropanoids, alkaloids, 
flavonoids, lignans, and others. The crude extracts and isolated constituents 
have exhibited a wide range of in vitro and in vivo pharmacological effects, 
including antitumor, cytotoxic, insecticidal, antimicrobial, anti-rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), anti-inflammatory, anti-ageing and antioxidative, and 
neuroprotective activities.
CONCLUSION: Plants of genus Celastrus have been confirmed to show a strong 
potential for therapeutic and health-maintaining effects, in light of their long 
traditional use and the phytochemical and pharmacological studies summarized 
here. Currently, pharmacological studies of this genus mainly focus on Celastrus 
paniculatus Willd. and Celastrus orbiculatus Thunb. Therefore, more 
pharmacological investigations should be implemented to support traditional uses 
of other medicinal plants of the genus Celastrus. Moreover, studies on the 
toxicity, bioavailability, and pharmacokinetics, in addition to clinical trials, 
are indispensable for assessing the safety and efficacy of the secondary 
metabolites or extracts obtained from plants belonging to this genus.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.111934
PMID: 31129308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol. 2018 Mar 28;29(2):107-122. doi: 
10.1515/jbcpp-2016-0132.

Acorus calamus: a bio-reserve of medicinal values.

Khwairakpam AD(1), Damayenti YD(1), Deka A(1), Monisha J(1), Roy NK(1), 
Padmavathi G(1), Kunnumakkara AB(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology Laboratory and DBT-AIST International Laboratory for Advanced 
Biomedicine (DAILAB), Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam-781039, India.
(2)Cancer Biology Laboratory and DBT-AIST International Laboratory for Advanced 
Biomedicine (DAILAB), Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam-781039, India, Phone: +91 361 
258 2231 (office), +91 789 600 5326 (mobile), Fax: +91 361 258 2249 (office), 
E-mail: kunnumakkara@iitg.ernet.in.

Many plants are found to possess reliable pharmacological properties and have 
started to attract the attention of researchers. One such holistic plant is 
Acorus calamus, commonly known as sweet flag, belonging to the rhizomatous 
family Acoraceae. The different parts of this plant, such as the leaves and 
rhizomes, are used traditionally in different medicinal preparations for the 
treatment of various ailments including arthritis, neuralgia, diarrhoea, 
dyspepsia, kidney and liver troubles, eczema, sinusitis, asthma, fevers, 
bronchitis, hair loss, and other disorders. Many reports have also appeared in 
mainstream scientific journals confirming its nutritional and medicinal 
properties. Biochemical analysis of the plant has revealed a large number of 
secondary metabolites that may be responsible for its rich medicinal properties. 
Basic scientific research has uncovered the mechanisms by which itexerts its 
therapeutic effects. Medicinal herbs such as A. calamus are quite promising in 
the recent therapeutic scenario, with a large number of people favouring 
remedies and health approaches that are free from the side effects often 
associated with synthetic chemicals. In this review, we try to summarise the 
ethno-medicinal uses, botanical descriptions, phytochemical constituents, and 
biological activity of the plant parts, as well as the molecular targets of A. 
calamus, which we hope will serve as a good base for further work on this plant.

DOI: 10.1515/jbcpp-2016-0132
PMID: 29389665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2015;16(6):506-16. doi: 10.2174/138920101606150407112903.

Gymnema sylvestre R. Br., an Indian medicinal herb: traditional uses, chemical 
composition, and biological activity.

Di Fabio G, Romanucci V, Di Marino C, Pisanti A, Zarrelli A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University Federico II, Complesso 
Universitario Monte S. Angelo, Via Cintia 4, IT-80126 Napoli, Italy. 
zarrelli@unina.it.

Gymnema sylvestre R. Br. is one of the most important medicinal plants that 
grows in tropical forests in India and South East Asia. Its active ingredients 
and extracts of leaves and roots are used in traditional medicine to treat 
various ailments and they are present in the market for pharmaceutical and 
parapharmaceutical products. Commercial products based on substances of plant 
origin that are generally connoted as natural have to be subjected to monitoring 
and evaluation by health authorities for their potential impacts on public 
health. The monitoring and evaluation of these products are critical because the 
boundary between a therapeutic action and a functional or healthy activity has 
not yet been defined in a clear and unambiguous way. Therefore, these products 
are considered borderline products, and they require careful and rigorous 
studies, in order to use them as complement and/or even replacement of synthetic 
drugs that are characterized by side effects and high economic costs. This 
review explores the traditional uses, chemical composition and biological 
activity of G. sylvestre extracts, providing a general framework on the most 
interesting extracts and what are the necessary studies for a complete 
definition of the range of activities.

DOI: 10.2174/138920101606150407112903
PMID: 25860062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:9232593. doi: 
10.1155/2016/9232593. Epub 2016 Aug 28.

Genus Tinospora: Ethnopharmacology, Phytochemistry, and Pharmacology.

Chi S(1), She G(1), Han D(1), Wang W(2), Liu Z(2), Liu B(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chinese Pharmacy, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 
100102, China.
(2)National Institute of Metrology, Beijing 100013, China.

The genus Tinospora includes 34 species, in which several herbs were used as 
traditional medicines by indigenous groups throughout the tropical and 
subtropical parts of Asia, Africa, and Australia. The extensive literature 
survey revealed Tinospora species to be a group of important medicinal plants 
used for the ethnomedical treatment of colds, headaches, pharyngitis, fever, 
diarrhea, oral ulcer, diabetes, digestive disorder, and rheumatoid arthritis. 
Indian ethnopharmacological data points to the therapeutic potential of the T. 
cordifolia for the treatment of diabetic conditions. While Tinospora species are 
confusing in individual ingredients and their mechanisms of action, the 
ethnopharmacological history of those plants indicated that they exhibit 
antidiabetic, antioxidation, antitumor, anti-inflammation, antimicrobial, 
antiosteoporosis, and immunostimulation activities. While the clinical 
applications in modern medicine are lacking convincing evidence and support, 
this review is aimed at summarizing the current knowledge of the traditional 
uses, phytochemistry, biological activities, and toxicities of the genus 
Tinospora to reveal its therapeutic potentials and gaps, offering opportunities 
for future researches.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9232593
PMCID: PMC5018348
PMID: 27648105


7. J Ethnopharmacol. 2018 Mar 1;213:302-310. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2017.11.003. Epub 
2017 Nov 4.

Population change of Trillium govanianum (Melanthiaceae) amid altered indigenous 
harvesting practices in the Indian Himalayas.

Chauhan HK(1), Bisht AK(2), Bhatt ID(3), Bhatt A(4), Gallacher D(5), Santo A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, D.S.B. Campus, Kumaun University, Nainital, 263001, 
India; G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment & Sustainable 
Development, Kosi- Katarmal, Almora 263643, India.
(2)Department of Botany, D.S.B. Campus, Kumaun University, Nainital, 263001, 
India.
(3)G.B. Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment & Sustainable 
Development, Kosi- Katarmal, Almora 263643, India.
(4)Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research, P. O. Box 24885, Safat 13109, 
Kuwait.
(5)Department of Interdisciplinary Studies, Zayed University, P.O. Box 19282, Al 
Ruwayyah, Dubai, UAE.
(6)University of Cagliari, 09123 Cagliari, Italy. Electronic address: 
andreasanto85@gmail.com.

ETHNOBOTANICAL RELEVANCE: Trillium govanianum Wall. ex D. Don (Melanthiaceae) is 
valued as a traditional medicinal herb in the Himalayan region. Applications 
include treatment of cancer, hypertension, neurasthenia, giddiness, arthritis, 
dysentery, inflammation, sepsis and reproductive disorders. Its range is highly 
specific, and limited to cold, shaded and moist habitats at 2400-3500 m a.s.l. 
Rhizomes are gathered from wild populations for trade, and this has recently 
emerged as a significant source of income among indigenous people of the Indian 
Himalayan region.
AIM: To assess the impact of changing rhizome prices on T. govanianum in the 
Indian Himalayan region by observing the status of existing populations and 
assessing the typical methods used for gathering and trade of rhizomes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Ecological attributes were assessed in 17 sites from 
Tirthan Valley (Himachal Pradesh), Munsiyari and Tunghnath (Uttarakhand). 
Socio-economic attributes assessed through communal focus groups and interviews 
with 579 medicinal plants gatherers and 19 traders, using semi-structured open 
ended questionnaires.
RESULTS: Population decline was highest in Munsiyari, followed by Tirthan Valley 
and Tunghnath, indicating that the species may become locally extinct in some 
areas. Methods used for gathering did not consider regeneration.
CONCLUSION: Gathering of T. govanianum from wild populations is unselective and 
unmanaged, raising the potential threat of local extinctions. Sustainable 
utilization and effective conservation is needed to protect the species and 
maintain community incomes. A status of 'threatened' is justified for the 
species in the Indian Himalayan region, due to its slow life cycle, specific 
habitat requirement, low population density, and commercial value.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2017.11.003
PMID: 29113957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2007 Jul;41(1):12-7. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.2007002.

Indian herbal medicines: possible potent therapeutic agents for rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Rathore B(1), Ali Mahdi A, Nath Paul B, Narayan Saxena P, Kumar Das S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, King George’s Medical University, Lucknow, 
226003, India.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease of unknown etiology and is 
mainly characterized by the progressive erosion of cartilage leading to chronic 
polyarthritis and joint distortion. Although the exact pathogenesis of the 
disease has yet not been elucidated, however, studies suggest that cellular 
proliferation of synoviocytes result in pannus formation which damages the 
cartilage and bone. Recent reports also support the role of free radicals in its 
pathogenesis. Apart from the conventional treatment strategies using 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, disease modifying antirheumatic drugs and 
glucocorticoids, newer and safer drugs are continuously being searched, as long 
term usage of these drugs have resulted in adverse effects. Alternative medicine 
provides another approach for treatment of RA and currently a number of 
medicinal plants are under scientific evaluation to develop a novel drug. There 
is a dire need to investigate the complete therapeutic potential and adverse 
effects, if any, of these herbals for providing newer and safer treatment 
options with minimum side effects. In this review we have tried to explore 
various Indian ancient Ayurvedic, Unani and Tibbi, as also some Chinese and 
Korean, herbals for their potential to treat RA.

DOI: 10.3164/jcbn.2007002
PMCID: PMC2274991
PMID: 18392103


9. Phytomedicine. 2019 Aug;61:152831. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2019.152831. Epub 2019 
Jan 10.

Dry leaf extracts of Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers attenuate oxidative 
stress and inflammatory condition in human monocytic (THP-1) cells.

Reddi KK(1), Tetali SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of 
Hyderabad, CUC, Prof. CR Rao Rd, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Telangana State 500046, 
India; Department of Bioscience Research, College of Dentistry, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of 
Hyderabad, CUC, Prof. CR Rao Rd, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Telangana State 500046, 
India. Electronic address: stetali@uohyd.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers is known for its therapeutic 
value in Indian traditional medicine for treating diabetes, rheumatoid 
arthritis, jaundice and cardiac diseases. However, information regarding its 
protective role against inflammatory diseases at the molecular level is limited.
PURPOSE: The objective of the present work is to study the antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory effect of alcoholic and water extracts of T. cordifolia 
(Willd.) Miers leaves in activated human monocytic THP-1 cells.
STUDY DESIGN/METHODS: Phytochemical analyses of the dry leaf extracts of T. 
cordifolia (Willd.) Miers prepared using the solvents alcohol (TCAE) or water 
(TCWE) are performed employing spectrophotometric methods for estimating total 
phenolic and flavonoid content, and the plant material was authenticated by 
detecting T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers metabolite biomarkers using LC-MS/MS. 
Arachidonic acid (AA)- and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated human monocytic 
(THP-1) cells were used as experimental models to investigate the antioxidant 
and anti-inflammatory activities of the plant extracts. Arachidonic acid 
(AA)-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) in THP-1 cells were monitored by 
confocal microscopy/spectrofluorimetry and transcript of antioxidant enzyme 
catalase (CAT), by quantitative real time PCR. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced 
proinflammatory marker like TNF-α at transcription and protein levels in THP-1 
cells were measured by quantitative real-time PCR or ELISA respectively. 
Further, the effect of T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers extracts on LPS-induced 
NF-κB translocation, and IκB and P-IκB protein levels, were studied by 
immunoblotting and confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers extracts exhibited significant amounts of 
total phenolic and flavonoid content, and LC-MS/MS analyses detected 
tinosponone, a TC-specific clerodane-derived diterpene. Both types of extracts 
attenuated AA-induced ROS generation via enhancing catalase enzyme activity in 
THP-1 cells. Real time PCR and ELISA experiments revealed that the elevated 
levels of LPS-induced TNF-α was remarkably attenuated in THP-1 cells pretreated 
with T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers extracts. Western blot and confocal microscopy 
showed that the alcoholic extract's anti-inflammatory activity by attenuating 
NF-κB translocation into the nucleus in LPS-activated THP-1 cells via the 
inhibition of IκB degradation in the cytosol.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers dry leaf 
extracts possess antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties via upregulation 
of antioxidant enzymes and attenuation of NF- κB nuclear translocation in 
activated human monocytic (THP-1) cells, therefore the present study supports 
our proposed molecular basis for the traditional use of T. cordifolia (Willd.) 
Miers for treating various inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2019.152831
PMID: 31035042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Prod Rep. 2009 Jan;26(1):72-89. doi: 10.1039/b809437n.

Boswellic acids: a group of medicinally important compounds.

Shah BA(1), Qazi GN, Taneja SC.

Author information:
(1)Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine (CSIR), Canal Road, Jammu Tawi, 
180001, India.

This review, containing over 276 references, covers the progress made in the 
chemistry and bioactivity of this important group of triterpenoids. Though 
initially known for their anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic activities 
through a unique 5-LO inhibition mechanism, boswellic acids have recently 
attained significance due to their anti-cancer properties. The phytochemistry 
and chemical modifications, including mechanism of action, are discussed.

DOI: 10.1039/b809437n
PMID: 19374123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2011 Jun;15(6):715-28. doi: 
10.1517/14728222.2011.561785. Epub 2011 Feb 27.

Status of research on MMPs in India.

Saravanan C(1), Singh SK.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Chemistry Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmaceutics, 
Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.

INTRODUCTION: MMPs are metal-dependant endopeptidases capable of degrading any 
one of the components of the extracellular matrix. In normal physiological 
conditions it is regulated by tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases, and any 
alteration in this regulatory process leads to pathological conditions.
AREAS COVERED: This review discusses the status of MMP research in India. The 
first research paper was published in 1998; the subsequent developments in this 
field led to an increase in the number of publications. This review highlights 
the growth of MMP research in India based on the research papers published from 
1998 to 2010. We identify four major subject areas: cancer, arthritis, ulcer and 
quantitative structure-activity relationship. The diseases involved are 
discussed along with the required steps for improving treatments.
EXPERT OPINION: Indian researchers need to work on new molecules with specific 
MMP inhibitory activity for cancer and communicable and geriatric diseases. 
Although several publications on natural products have appeared from India, they 
are very few considering the number of medicinal plants available in the 
country. Inhibiting MMPs could be both beneficial and detrimental to cells, 
owing to the inter-relationship between normal physiology and pathology; thus, 
targeting MMPs with broad MMP inhibitors can have mixed blessings.

DOI: 10.1517/14728222.2011.561785
PMID: 21557675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Angiogenesis. 2004;7(2):115-22. doi: 10.1007/s10456-004-1026-3.

Withaferin A is a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis.

Mohan R(1), Hammers HJ, Bargagna-Mohan P, Zhan XH, Herbstritt CJ, Ruiz A, Zhang 
L, Hanson AD, Conner BP, Rougas J, Pribluda VS.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Research, EntreMed, Inc., Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Royce.Mohan@uky.edu

The medicinal plant Withania somnifera is widely researched for its 
anti-inflammatory, cardioactive and central nervous system effects. In Ayurveda 
, the major Traditional Indian medicine system, extracts from W. somnifera are 
distinctively employed for the treatment of arthritis and menstrual disorders. 
Because these conditions involve angiogenic processes we hypothesized that the 
W. somnifera extracts might contain angiogenesis inhibitors. We employed an 
endothelial cell-sprouting assay to monitor the purification of substances from 
W. somnifera root extracts and isolated as the active principle the previously 
known natural product withaferin A. We show that withaferin A inhibits human 
umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) sprouting in three-dimensional 
collagen-I matrix at doses which are relevant to NF-kappa B-inhibitory activity. 
Withaferin A inhibits cell proliferation in HUVECs (IC50 =12 nM) at doses that 
are significantly lower than those required for tumor cell lines through a 
process associated with inhibition of cyclin D1 expression. We propose that the 
inhibition of NF-kappa B by withaferin A in HUVECs occurs by interference with 
the ubiquitin-mediated proteasome pathway as suggested by the increased levels 
of poly-ubiquitinated proteins. Finally, withaferin A is shown to exert potent 
anti-angiogenic activity in vivo at doses that are 500-fold lower than those 
previously reported to exert anti-tumor activity in vivo. In conclusion, our 
findings identify a novel mode of action of withaferin A, which highlights the 
potential use of this natural product for cancer treatment or prevention.

DOI: 10.1007/s10456-004-1026-3
PMID: 15516832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;137(1):289-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.05.022. Epub 
2011 May 27.

Herbal drug patenting in India: IP potential.

Sahoo N(1), Manchikanti P, Dey SH.

Author information:
(1)Rajiv Gandhi School of Intellectual Property Law, IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur 
721302, West Bengal, India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Herbal drugs are gaining worldwide prominence 
due to their distinct advantages. Developing countries have started exploring 
the ethnopharmacological approach of drug discovery and have begun to file 
patents on herbal drugs. The expansion of R&D in Indian herbal research 
organizations and presence of manufacturing units at non-Indian sites is an 
indication of the capability to develop new products and processes. The present 
study attempts to identify innovations in the Indian herbal drug sector by 
analyzing the patenting trends in India, US and EU.
METHODOLOGY: Based on key word and IPC based search at the IPO, USPTO, Esp@cenet 
and WIPO databases, patent applications and grant in herbal drugs by Indian 
applicants/assignees was collected for the last ten years (from 1st January 2001 
to 31st October 2010). From this collection patents related to human therapeutic 
use only were selected. Analysis was performed to identify filing trends, major 
applicants/assignees, disease area and major plant species used for various 
treatments.
RESULT: There is a gradual increase in patent filing through the years. In 
India, individual inventors have maximum applications and grants. CSIR, among 
research organizations and Hindustan Unilever, Avesthagen, Piramal Life Science, 
Sahajanand Biotech and Indus Biotech among the companies have the maximum 
granted patents in India, US and EU respectively. Diabetes, cancer and 
inflammatory disorders are the major areas for patenting in India and abroad. 
Recent patents are on new herbal formulations for treatment of AIDS, hepatitis, 
skin disorders and gastrointestinal disorders.
CONCLUSION: A majority of the herbal patents applications and grants in India 
are with individual inventors. Claim analysis indicates that these patents 
include novel multi-herb compositions with synergistic action. Indian research 
organizations are more active than companies in filing for patents. CSIR has 
maximum numbers of applications not only in India but also in the US and EU. 
Patents by research organizations and herbal companies are on development of new 
processes for active compound isolation and standardization of such components 
in addition to new compositions for therapeutic use. Pharmaceutical companies 
such as Ranbaxy, Lupin and Panacea Biotec are increasingly patenting on herbal 
drugs. There is increased patenting activity related to diabetes, cancer, 
cardiovascular diseases, asthma and arthritis in India and abroad.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.05.022
PMID: 21640810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Indian J Exp Biol. 2016 Oct;54(10):650-658.

Carissa congesta Wight and Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn. as budding 
immunomodulatory agents.

Une HD, Doshi GM.

Carissa congesta and Benincasa hispida are well-known medicinally important 
plants associated with diabetes, inflammation, protozal infections and cancer. 
Here, we emphasized up on the immunomodulatory potential of these plants as the 
source of lupeol, P-sitosterol and ursolic acid. Petroleum ether extracts of C. 
congesta roots and B. hispida seeds were subjected to acute toxicity studies. 
They were screened for its immunomodulatory prospective in rats by 
Haemagglutination Antibody (HA) titre and Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity (DTH) 
response using Sheep Red Blood Cells (SRBCs of-0.5x10⁹) as antigens. Carbon 
Clearance test (Phagocytic Index) was estimated by Indian ink suspension. 
Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA) induced arthritis model interpretation was done 
by paw edema, kene joint erosion (transverse section), body weights, arthritic 
index and biochemical levels (RBC, WBC and Hb levels). Both the extracts were 
found to be therapeutically safe up to 5000 mg/kg. Dosage of 100 mg/kg was not 
satisfactory; and 500 and 250 mg/kg showed significant immunostimmulation (HA 
Titre) and immunosuppression (DTH response, 48 h). Benincasa hispida seed and 
Carissa congesta root extracts showed phagocytic Index of 0.0163±0.003, 
0.0145±0.003 and 0.0183±0.003, 0.0176±0.003 at 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg, 
respectively. CFA model revealed that the B. hispida seed and C. congesta root 
extracts decreased paw volume, knee joint erosion, increased body weights and 
biochemical parameters with an arthritic index of 1.31±0.12, 1.44±0.15 and 1. 
16±0.09, 1.36±0.13 at 250 mg/kg and 500 mg, respectively. The results were 
interpreted by One- way ANOVA followed by Dunnett test. Extracts showed 
relevance as promising immunostimulators as compared to control.

PMID: 30084565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Indian J Exp Biol. 2000 Dec;38(12):1177-82.

Semecarpus anacardium Linn. nuts--a boon in alternative medicine.

Premalatha B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Dr A.L.M. P-G. I.B.M.S., University of 
Madras, Taramani Campus, Chennai 600 113, India. bpremalatha@yahoo.com

In alternative medicine, medicinal plant preparations have found widespread use 
particularly in the case of diseases not amenable to treatment by modern 
methods. Chemical and phytochemical analyses of Semecarpus anacardium nut reveal 
the presence of biflavonoids, phenolic compounds, bhilawanols, minerals, 
vitamins and amino acids. A variety of nut extract preparations from this source 
are effective against many diseases, viz. arthritis, tumours, infections etc. 
and non-toxic even at high dose of 2000 mg/kg. However understanding of the 
mechanism of the pharmacological action of S. anacardium nut can be greatly 
aided by the isolation of its active principle from the nut and determination of 
the structure-function relationship. Also, the potent curative effect of S. 
anacardium nut extract against human ailments need to be verified by controlled 
clinical studies.

PMID: 11411037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Ethnopharmacol. 2017 Feb 2;197:147-156. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.07.059. Epub 
2016 Jul 22.

Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM) improved neurobehavioral deficits following acute 
ischemic stroke by attenuating neuroinflammatory response.

Jhelum P(1), Wahul AB(1), Kamle A(2), Kumawat S(2), Kumar A(2), Bhutani KK(3), 
Tripathi SM(4), Chakravarty S(5).

Author information:
(1)Chemical Biology, CSIR - Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka, 
Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India.
(2)CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Habsiguda, Uppal Road, 
Hyderabad 500007, India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceuticals, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research (NIPER), Mohali, Chandigarh 500037, India.
(4)Department of Pharmaceuticals, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research (NIPER), Mohali, Chandigarh 500037, India. Electronic address: 
drsmtripathi5@gmail.com.
(5)Chemical Biology, CSIR - Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka, 
Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India. Electronic address: sumana98@gmail.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Cerebral ischemic stroke is one of the leading 
causes of death and long-term disability worldwide. Unfortunately, due to the 
failure of most of drugs in clinical trials recently, attentions have moved 
towards the traditional system of medicines including Ayurveda. In Ayurveda, 
Sameerpannag Ras (SR) is a mineral and metallic origin based formulation which 
has been used for the treatment of arthritis and chronic systematic inflammatory 
disorder. The current study was designed to investigate the neuroprotective 
effects of Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM), on the neurobehavioral dysfunction 
and associated neuroinflammation, induced by transient Internal Carotid Artery 
Occlusion (ICAO) in mice model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, mice were treated with Sameerpannag 
Ras Mixture (SRM) at the dose of 40mg/kg body weight by oral gavages for 3 and 
7days respectively, twice a day, after the induction of ICAO for 90min followed 
by reperfusion. The efficacy of SRM was examined by scoring neurological 
behavioral deficit using the standard neurological deficit score (NDS), grip 
strength and rotarod performance tests at different time intervals of post-ICAO.
RESULTS: Post-ischemic treatment with Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM) at 40mg/kg 
significantly reduced Neurological Deficit Score and improved the motor 
coordination at different time intervals post-ICAO. The analysis of RT-qPCR data 
showed that transient cerebral ischemia could induce the inflammatory response 
genes in the affected striatal region of ICAO group, as compared to sham group, 
on day3 and day7 post-ICAO. Interestingly, SRM treatment showed marked 
improvement in the ischemia-induced neurobehavioral deficits by attenuating 
ischemia-induced neuroinflammatory response at both gene and protein level.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM) 
treatment ameliorates behavioral outcomes after mild ischemia through the 
suppression of a number of inflammatory response genes involved in neuronal 
damage. This is the first report of the molecular mechanism underlying the 
significant neuroprotective action of the Ayurvedic drug, Sameerpannag Ras 
Mixture (SRM), using a mild stroke in mice model.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.07.059
PMID: 27457696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Indian J Exp Biol. 1981 Mar;19(3):245-9.

Influence of an Indian medicine (Ashwagandha) on acute-phase reactants in 
inflammation.

Anbalagan K, Sadique J.

PMID: 7251069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Indian J Med Res. 1972 Jun;60(6):929-31.

Anti-inflammatory studies on a crystalline steroid isolated from Commiphora 
mukul.

Arora RB, Taneja V, Sharma RC, Gupta SK.

PMID: 4660307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Indian J Pharmacol. 2015 Jan-Feb;47(1):59-64. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.150340.

Evaluation of anti-osteoarthritic activity of Vigna mungo in papain induced 
osteoarthritis model.

Patel DV(1), Sawant MG(2), Kaur G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SPP School of Pharmacy and Technology Management, 
Vile Parle (West), India.
(2)Department of Toxicology, Haffkine Institute, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

AIM: This study was carried out to evaluate the effect of Vigna mungo 
hydroalcoholic extract (VMHA) by papain induced osteoarthritis (OA) in the rat 
model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: OA was induced by intra-articular injection of papain (4% 
w/v) along with cysteine (0.03 M) on day 1, 4 and 7 in rats and VMHA was 
administered orally in three doses (100, 200 and 400 mg/kg) after last papain 
injection. The anti-osteoarthritic activity was evaluated by measuring knee 
joint diameter, grip strength, locomotion activity and hanging time. 
Histopathological analysis and acute toxicity study were also performed.
RESULTS: VMHA improved inflammatory condition with all the doses, but 
significant (P < 0.05) attenuation of inflammation was present only with 400 
mg/kg dose. The grip strength, locomotion activity and hanging time were also 
significantly (P < 0.05) improved at dose level of 100 mg/kg however other two 
doses (200 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg) were not found to be effective. VMHA did not 
show any mortality or any toxic clinical signs after oral administration of 2 
g/kg dose.
CONCLUSION: VMHA improved arthritic condition by significantly reducing pain and 
inflammation.

DOI: 10.4103/0253-7613.150340
PMCID: PMC4375821
PMID: 25821313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.


20. Phytomedicine. 2002 Jul;9(5):433-7. doi: 10.1078/09447110260571689.

Preliminary evaluation of anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic activity of S. 
lappa, A. speciosa and A. aspera.

Gokhale AB(1), Damre AS, Kulkami KR, Saraf MN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Bombay College of Pharmacy, Kalina, Mumbai, 
India.

Saussurea lappa, Argyreia speciosa and Achyranthes aspera are well known Indian 
medicinal plants used in the indigenous systems of medicine for the treatment of 
inflammatory conditions. The ethanolic extracts of the plants at the doses of 
50, 100 and 200 mg/kg, p.o. were screened for their effect on acute and chronic 
inflammation induced in mice and rats. S. lappa and A. speciosa were found to 
significantly inhibit paw edema induced by carrageenan and Freund's complete 
adjuvant and to prevent accumulation of inflammatory cells in 
carrageenan-induced peritonitis at doses of 50-200 mg/kg. A. aspera inhibited 
these inflammatory responses at doses of 100-200 mg/kg. The studies reveal that 
the ethanolic extracts of S. lappa, A. speciosa and A. aspera possess 
anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic activity and support the rationale behind 
the traditional use of these plants in inflammatory conditions.

DOI: 10.1078/09447110260571689
PMID: 12222664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Indian J Med Res. 1972 Jan;60(1):138-42.

Anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic activity of volatile oil of Curcuma longa 
(Haldi).

Chandra D, Gupta SS.

PMID: 5029117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Indian J Exp Biol. 1980 Aug;18(8):843-6.

Effect of mangostin, a xanthone from Garcinia mangostana Linn. in 
immunopathological & inflammatory reactions.

Gopalakrishnan C, Shankaranarayanan D, Kameswaran L, Nazimudeen SK.

PMID: 7461736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Indian J Exp Biol. 1974 Sep;12(5):444-6.

Clinical toxicity study of Semecarpus anacardium Linn. f.

Murty GK.

PIP: Semecarpus anacardium was administered to 266 cases in 3 formulations: 
Amrit Bhallatak (186 cases), RB 3 (48 cases), and Garsin (32 cases). The Amrit 
Bhallatak is a compound formulation containing extract of both the cotyledons 
and the pericarp of the fruit of Semecarpus anacardium. RB3 is composed of the 
whole cotyledon (300 mg); the daily dose of cotyledons was 3.6 g. Garsin 
contained 200 g of cotyledons. The extract is derived by separating the oil by a 
physical process. The daily dosage of Amrit Bhallatak was 10 g/day, that of 
Garsin, 2.4 g/day. No toxicity or side effects were observed. The therapeutic 
value of Semecarpus anacardium in arthropathies, atopic dermatitis, leucoderma, 
leprosy, hypothyroidism, oligospermia, and azoospermia and its value as an oral 
contraceptive have been studied. The most significant effect was on the ovaries 
and testes. The drug probably acts via the hypophysics. Out of 266 patients, 189 
were men, 77 women between 30-45 years of age. The treatment was restricted to 
internal medication by mouth. No external contact or application of the drug was 
applied. Of the 77 women treated with the drug, 41 were followed up after 
treatment. 12 had become pregnant and none showed any teratogenecity.

PMID: 4448495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Indian J Med Res. 1969 Dec;57(12):2232-9.

Efficacy of glycerrhitinic acid as a steroidal agent.

Malhotra SC, Ahuja MM.

PMID: 5374758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Indian J Exp Biol. 1972 Jan;10(1):41-2.

Anti-inflammatory activity of the oil isolated from Cyperus scariosus (R. Br.).

Gupta SK, Sharma RC, Aggarwal OP, Arora RB.

PMID: 4638006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006 Nov 24;108(2):228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.05.018. 
Epub 2006 May 26.

In vitro anti-proliferative and antioxidant studies on Devil's Club Oplopanax 
horridus.

Tai J(1), Cheung S, Cheah S, Chan E, Hasman D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Pediatrics, Center for Complementary Medicine 
Research, BC Child and Family Research Institute, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. jtai@interchange.ubc.ca

Devil's Club, Oplopanax horridus (OH), is a widely used folk medicine in Alaska 
and British Columbia for treating a variety of ailments including arthritis, 
fever and diabetes. HPLC profiling shows that numerous compounds are present in 
the 70% ethanolic extract of OH dry root bark powder. OH extract inhibited K562, 
HL60, MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cell growth with the 50% inhibition (IC(50)) estimated 
at 1/2700, 1/1700, 1/500 and 1/2500 dilutions, respectively. Non-cytotoxic 
concentrations (<IC(50)) of OH extract combined with non-cytotoxic 
concentrations (<IC(50)) of camptothecin (CAM) or paclitaxel (PTX) were tested 
on the tumor cell lines. Of the 19 combinations tested, 9 showed additive or 
synergistic anti-proliferative effect while the rest showed antagonistic effect. 
Combination of OH extract at 1/4000 and 1/16,000 dilutions with 0.1 microM of 
CAM produced additive, anti-proliferative effects on K562 cells, as did 1/2000 
and 1/1000 dilutions of OH combined with 2.5 nM of PTX on MCF7, and 1/4000 
dilution of OH with 1 nM of PTX on MDA-MB-468 cells. Combination of 1/8000 and 
1/4000 dilution of OH with 0.05 microM of CAM showed strong synergistic 
anti-proliferative effects on HL60 cells. At non-cytotoxic 1/4000 dilution, OH 
induced 13.1% of HL60 cells to differentiate into granulocytes but had no effect 
on monocyte/macrophage differentiation. A cell free hydroxyl radical scavenging 
assay estimated that OH at 1/100, 1/10 and 1/5 dilutions showed activities 
equivalent to 2.7, 15.7 and 25.6 microM of Trolox, respectively. At 
non-cytotoxic 1/4000 and 1/2000 dilutions, OH significantly reduced nitric oxide 
production by lipopolysaccharide activated RAW 264.7 cells (p<0.001). Our data 
show that the ethanolic extract of OH has anti-proliferative on several cancer 
cell lines, and has strong antioxidant activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.05.018
PMID: 16814500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Oct 11;137(3):1504-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.08.038. 
Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic properties of Thespesia populnea 
Soland ex. Correa seed extracts and its fractions in animal models.

Shah AS(1), Alagawadi KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, KLEU's College of Pharmacy, Belgaum, 
Karnataka, India. amol2473@indiatimes.com

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Thespesia populnea Sol. ex Correa (Malvaceae) is 
commonly known as "Indian tulip tree". The plant has been used as an astringent, 
antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antinociceptive and hepatoprotective in Indian 
system of traditional medicine.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thespesia populnea seeds were successively extracted by 
soxhlet extraction using petroleum ether (40-60 °C) (TPO) and ethanol (TPE). 
Unsaponifiable matter (TPOUM) and fatty acids were separated from seed oil. A 
GC-MS analysis of fatty acid methyl esters was carried out. Ethanolic extract 
was fractionated using CHCl(3), EtOAc, n-BuOH and H(2)O. Acute arthritis was 
induced by sub-plantar injection of carrageenan into the left hind paw of rats. 
The paw volume was measured using plethysmometer. Analgesic activity was 
assessed by heat induced pains (tail immersion model) and antipyretic activity 
assessed using brewers yeast-induced pyrexia model.
RESULTS: Oral administration of TPO and TPE at 200 and 400 mg/kg b.w. and tested 
fractions at 200mg/kg significantly reduced carrageenan induced paw edema and 
brewers yeast-induced pyrexia. In tail immersion method also extracts and 
fractions showed significant analgesic activity. Amongst all fractions EtOAc 
showed most significant results. TPOUM showed significant anti-inflammatory and 
analgesic activity. GC-MS analyses showed the presence of fourteen fatty acids, 
predominant fatty acids were palmitic and stearic acid.
CONCLUSION: These results highlighted anti-inflammatory, analgesic and 
antipyretic effects of Thespesia populnea seeds.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.08.038
PMID: 21893182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1969 Jan;13(1):37-45.

Anti-inflammatory activity of Semecarpus anacardium Linn. A preliminary study.

Satyavati GV, Prasad DN, Das PK, Singh HD.

PMID: 4982025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 May 7;141(1):474-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.03.015. Epub 
2012 Mar 20.

Effects of Tinospora cordifolia (Menispermaceae) on the proliferation, 
osteogenic differentiation and mineralization of osteoblast model systems in 
vitro.

Abiramasundari G(1), Sumalatha KR, Sreepriya M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Bangalore University, Jnana 
Bharathi Campus, Bangalore 560056, Karnataka, India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Ancient Indian ayurvedic literature prescribes 
Tinospora cordifolia as a remedy to rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory and 
allied diseases of musculo skeletal system.
AIM: To investigate the effects of the alcoholic extract of Tinospora cordifolia 
(TC) on the proliferation, differentiation and mineralization of bone like 
matrix on osteoblast model systems in vitro and hence its possible use as a 
potential anti-osteoporotic agent.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two in vitro osteoblast model systems were used in the 
study viz., human osteoblast-like cells MG-63 and primary osteoblast cells 
isolated from femur of rats. Cell growth and viability was assessed by standard 
colorimetric assays like MTT assay. The cell differentiation into osteoblastic 
lineage was evaluated by the activities of bone marker alkaline phosphatase. The 
effect of the extract on matrix mineralization was assessed by alizarin red-s 
staining and Von kossa staining. Cell morphology was studied by phase contrast 
microscopy and light microscopy (Giemsa/crystal violet staining).
RESULTS: Results indicate that the alcoholic extract of TC at a dosage of 
25μg/ml stimulated the growth of osteoblasts, increased the differentiation of 
cells into osteoblastic lineage and increased the mineralization of bone like 
matrix on both the osteoblast model systems used in the study. Cell morphology 
studies clearly indicated the increase in cell numbers and absence of adverse 
change in the cell morphology on treatment with the extract.
CONCLUSION: TC extract has a potential influence on osteogenesis and hence its 
use could be explored as a potential anti-osteoporotic agent.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.03.015
PMID: 22449439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Indian J Med Sci. 1962 Oct;16:847-51.

Endocrinological studies on the oleo resin of gum guggul.

GUJRAL ML, SAREEN K, REDDY GS, AMMA MK, KUMARI GS.

PMID: 13963503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Indian J Med Res. 1965 Jan;53:71-80.

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES ON THE ANTIARTHRITIC EFFECT OF CERTAIN INDIGENOUS DRUGS.

CHATURVEDI GN, SINGH RH.

PMID: 14266449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Indian J Med Res. 1966 Jun;54(6):582-9.

A study of anti-inflammatory activity of some indigenous drugs in albino rats.

Prasad DN, Bhattacharya SK, Das PK.

PMID: 5947023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Indian Med Assoc. 1966 Mar 1;46(5):234-7.

A study of anti-arthritic action of Vanda roxburghii in albino rats.

Prasad DN, Achari G.

PMID: 5906161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Indian J Med Res. 1969 Jun;57(6):1095-102.

Annanase induced degenerative arthritis and the effect of an indigenous drug.

Prasad GC, Singh RH.

PMID: 5823176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1963 Apr;7:92-9.

EFFECT OF CERTAIN COMPOUNDS ON THE INFLAMMATORY REACTION IN RATS.

RINDANI TH, BILLIMORIA FR, RAO VR, DESAI MH, MEHTA KA.

PMID: 14064082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Versicherungsmedizin. 1999 Sep 1;51(3):122-7.

[Herbal drugs of foreign cultures and medical systems exemplified by Indian 
incense. Considerations regarding social and insurance medicine expert 
assessment].

[Article in German]

Kreck C(1), Saller R.

Author information:
(1)MDK in Hessen, Universitätsspital Zürich.

Increase preparations are being used with increasing frequency in Western 
medicine. In experimental investigations, an anti-inflammatory effect has been 
shown. Clinical observations relate to increase applications in rheumatoid 
arthritis, malignant brain tumors, inflammatory bowel diseases and asthma 
bronchiale. A relevant clinical effect of increase preparations has not been 
ascertained. In Germany, the registration of increase preparation H 15 as a drug 
has been withheld by the federal drug registration office (former 
"Bundesgesundheitsamt"). Health funds may reimburse costs for increase 
preparations in exceptional cases only.

PMID: 10516835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]