Cancer is a major public health problem and the second leading cause of 
mortality around the world. Although continuous advances in the science of 
oncology and cancer research are now leading to improved outcomes for many 
cancer patients, novel cancer treatment options are strongly demanded. Naturally 
occurring compounds from a variety of vegetables, fruits, and medicinal plants 
have been shown to exhibit various anticancer properties in a number of in vitro 
and in vivo studies and represent an attractive research area for the 
development of new therapeutic strategies to fight cancer. Forskolin is a 
diterpene produced by the roots of the Indian plant Coleus forskohlii. The 
natural compound forskolin has been used for centuries in traditional medicine 
and its safety has also been documented in conventional modern medicine. 
Forskolin directly activates the adenylate cyclase enzyme, that generates cAMP 
from ATP, thus, raising intracellular cAMP levels. Notably, cAMP signaling, 
through the PKA-dependent and/or -independent pathways, is very relevant to 
cancer and its targeting has shown a number of antitumor effects, including the 
induction of mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition, inhibition of cell growth and 
migration and enhancement of sensitivity to conventional antitumor drugs in 
cancer cells. Here, we describe some features of cAMP signaling that are 
relevant to cancer biology and address the state of the art concerning the 
natural cAMP elevating compound forskolin and its perspectives as an effective 
anticancer agent. J. Cell. Physiol. 232: 922-927, 2017. © 2016 Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.