Chemopreventive potential of an Indian medicinal plant (Tinospora cordifolia) on 
skin carcinogenesis in mice.

Chaudhary R(1), Jahan S, Goyal PK.

Author information:
(1)Radiation and Cancer Biology Laboratory, Department of Zoology, University of 
Rajasthan, Jaipur-302 004, India.

Tinospora cordifolia (Guduchi), an Indian medicinal plant, was used to explore 
antitumor promoting activity in a two-stage skin carcinogenesis model. For this 
purpose, mice were treated by single application of DMBA (100 microg/100 microl 
of acetone) and two weeks later promoted by croton oil (1% in acetone three 
times a week) until the end of the experiment (i.e., 16 weeks). Oral 
administration of the above extract at the preinitiational stage (i.e., seven 
days before and seven days after DMBA application; group IV), promotional stage 
(i.e., from the time of croton oil application; group V), and both pre- and 
postintiational stage (i.e., from the time of DMBA application and continued 
until the end of the experiment; group VI; on the shaven backs of the mice at 
the dose of 100 mg/kg body weight/day for 16 weeks) recorded significant 
reduction in tumor weight, tumor incidence in comparison to control (i.e., mice 
treated with DMBA and croton oil; group III). Furthermore, cumulative number of 
papillomas, tumor yield, tumor burden, and tumor weight showed significant 
reduction along with significant elevation of phase II detoxifying enzymes, and 
inhibition of lipid peroxidation in liver and skin in the animals administered 
with such plant extract concomitant to carcinogen exposure. Thus, the present 
data strongly suggests that the Tinospora cordifolia extract has anti-tumor 
potential in a two-stage skin carcinogenesis mouse model.
