Unconventional therapies for cancer: 1. Essiac. The Task Force on Alternative 
Therapies of the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative.

Kaegi E(1).

Author information:
(1)National Cancer Institute of Canada, Toronto, Ont.

Physicians and patients have been frustrated by the lack of reliable information 
on unconventional therapies. To help fill this gap in the area of breast cancer 
therapy, the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative formed a task force to 
advise it on how best to promote research into unconventional therapies. As part 
of the work of the task force, a review of the available literature was carried 
out for each of the following products: Essiac, green tea, Iscador, hydrazine 
sulfate, vitamins A, C and E, and 714-X. The first article in this series on 
unconventional therapies for cancer describes the methodology used to obtain and 
evaluate the information and provides a summary of the findings on Essiac. 
Subsequent articles will cover the other products. For most of the products 
reviewed, there has been some indication of possible benefit but no definitive 
evidence. Innovative and collaborative research needed to meet the information 
needs of growing numbers of patients and their physicians is now being sponsored 
by the Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiative. Open communication between 
patients and physicians is also necessary for the maintenance of an appropriate 
therapeutic partnership and for the identification and control of side effects. 
The Ontario Division of the Canadian Cancer Society, a partner in the Canadian 
Breast Cancer Research Initiative, supported the preparation of a 
patient-information piece on unconventional therapies to accompany the series. 
This item will assist patients who are considering such therapies and will 
promote open communication between patients and their physicians.