Betel nut and tobacco chewing; potential risk factors of cancer of oesophagus in 
Assam, India.

Phukan RK(1), Ali MS, Chetia CK, Mahanta J.

Author information:
(1)Regional Medical Research Centre, Indian Council of Medical Research, North 
East Region, Assam, Dibrugarh, India.

Cancer of the oesophagus is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in males in 
Assam, in north-eastern India, and ranks second for females. The chewing of 
betel nut, with or without tobacco and prepared in various ways, is a common 
practice in the region and a case-control study has been designed to study the 
pattern of risk associated with different ways of preparing and chewing the 
nuts. 358 newly diagnosed male patients and 144 female have been interviewed 
together with 2 control subjects for each case chosen at random from among the 
attendants who accompanied patients to hospital. There were significant trends 
in risk ratios associated with the frequency of chewing each day, with the 
duration of chewing in years and with the age at which the habit was started 
that were apparent for both males and females and which remained significant 
after allowance was made for other known risk factors, notably tobacco smoking 
and alcohol consumption. The adjusted ratios, in comparison with non-chewers, 
were 13.3 M and 5.7 F for chewing more than 20 times a day, 10.6 M and 7.2 F for 
persons who had chewed for more than 20 years and 10.3 M and 5.3 F for those who 
had started before the age of 20. Among the different combinations of 
ingredients that were chewed the adjusted odds ratios were highest for those who 
had been using fermented betel nut with any form of tobacco (7.1 M and 3.6 F). 
The risk associated with tobacco smoking and alcohol consumption, which are high 
in some parts of the world, were less in Assam than those associated with the 
chewing of betel nut.

