Methyl angolensate from callus of Indian redwood induces cytotoxicity in human 
breast cancer cells.

Chiruvella KK(1), Panjamurthy K, Choudhary B, Joy O, Raghavan SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India.

AIM: Natural products discovered from medicinal plants have played an important 
role in the treatment of cancer. Methyl angolensate (MA), a tetranortriterpenoid 
obtained from the root callus of Indian Redwood tree, Soymida febrifuga Roxb. 
(A.Juss) was tested for its anticancer properties on breast cancer cells.
METHODS: Cell viability was tested using trypan blue, MTT and LDH assays. 
Tritiated thymidine assay and flowcytometry were used to study effect of MA on 
cell proliferation. The activation of apoptosis was checked by annexin V and 
JC-1 staining followed by FACS analysis. Immunoblotting analysis was used for 
studying expression of apoptotic and DNA double strand break repair proteins.
RESULTS: We find that MA inhibited the growth of breast cancer cell line, T47D 
in a time- and dose-dependent manner. MA treatment led to the inhibition of cell 
proliferation as detected by tritiated thymidine assay and flowcytometry. 
Further, MA treated cells exhibited typical apoptotic morphological changes and 
led to the accumulation of subG1 peak in cell cycle distribution. The induction 
of apoptosis was further confirmed both by annexin V staining and JC1 staining. 
We also find that MA activates MAP kinase pathway to induce apoptosis. Besides, 
we find a time dependent activation followed by degradation of DNA double-strand 
break repair proteins upon treatment with MA.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that MA induces cytotoxicity in breast cancer 
cells. Further, the altered expression of DSB repair proteins in MA treated 
cells may control the induction of apoptosis in these cancer cells.

