Evaluation of Anticancer, Antioxidant, and Possible Anti-inflammatory Properties 
of Selected Medicinal Plants Used in Indian Traditional Medication.

Shaikh R(1), Pund M(2), Dawane A(2), Iliyas S(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University, Nanded 
- 431 606, Maharashtra, India ; Department of Botany, Poona College, Camp, Pune 
- 411 001, Maharashtra, India.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University, Nanded 
- 431 606, Maharashtra, India.
(3)Department of Botany, Poona College, Camp, Pune - 411 001, Maharashtra, 
India.

The present study was carried out to evaluate the anticancer, antioxidant, and 
possible anti-inflammatory properties of diverse medicinal plants frequently 
used in Indian traditional medication. The selected botanicals such as Soymida 
fembrifuga (Roxb.) A. Juss. (Miliaceae), Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers. 
(Menispermaceae), Lavandula bipinnata (L.) O. Ktze. (Lamiaceae), and Helicteres 
isora L. (Sterculiaceae) extracted in different solvents were evaluated for 
their in vitro anticancer and antioxidant activities. The results obtained 
indicate that H. isora has potent cytotoxic activity toward the selected cancer 
cells such as HeLa-B75 (34.21 ± 0.24%), HL-60 (30.25 ± 1.36%), HEP-3B (25.36 ± 
1.78%), and PN-15 (29.21 ± 0.52%). Interestingly, the selected botanicals 
selectively inhibited cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) more than (COX-1), which are the 
key enzymes implicated in inflammation. COX-2 inhibition was observed to be in 
the range of 19.66-49.52% as compared to COX-1 inhibition (3.93-19.61%). The 
results of the antioxidant study revealed that the selected plants were found to 
be effective 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), hydroxyl (OH), and superoxide 
radical (SOR) scavenging agents. High-performance thin layer chromatography 
(HPTLC) fingerprint of flavonoids was used as a measure of quality control of 
the selected plant samples. The results of the present findings strengthen the 
potential of the selected plants as a resource for the discovery of novel 
anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant agents.
