Extract of Vernonia condensata, Inhibits Tumor Progression and Improves Survival 
of Tumor-allograft Bearing Mouse.

Thomas E(1), Gopalakrishnan V(2), Somasagara RR(1), Choudhary B(2), Raghavan 
SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560 012, 
India.
(2)Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology, Electronics City, 
Bangalore 560 100, India.

Medicinal plants are considered as one of the ideal sources for cancer therapy 
due to their bioactive contents and low toxicity to humans. Vernonia genus is 
one of the common medicinal plants, which has wide spread usage in food and 
medicine. However, there are limited studies to explore its anticancer 
properties. In the current study, we have used Vernonia condensata, to explore 
its anticancer activity using various approaches. Here, we show that extract 
prepared from Vernonia condensata (VCE) exhibits cytotoxic properties against 
various cancer cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Interestingly, when 
treated with VCE, there was no significant cytotoxicity in peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Flow cytometry analysis revealed that although VCE 
induced cell death, arrest was not observed. VCE treatment led to disruption of 
mitochondrial membrane potential in a concentration dependent manner resulting 
in activation of apoptosis culminating in cell death. Immunoblotting studies 
revealed that VCE activated intrinsic pathway of apoptosis. More importantly, 
VCE treatment resulted in tumor regression leading to significant enhancement in 
life span in treated mice, without showing any detectable side effects. 
Therefore, for the first time our study reveals the potential of extract from 
Vernonia condensata to be used as an anticancer agent.
