
Strategies and techniques for multi-component drug design from medicinal herbs 
and traditional Chinese medicine.

Wang Y(1), Fan X, Qu H, Gao X, Cheng Y.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Informatics Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, 
China.

Many common diseases like diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer are 
caused or exacerbated by disparate physiological, pathological, environmental, 
and lifestyle factors. However, the chief aim of current drug discovery 
approaches is to search for single-entity drugs that interact with well-defined 
molecular targets (a single receptor or enzyme). The concept of multi-target 
drugs or multi-component therapy is gaining increased attention with the 
discovery that many diseases (like hypertension) are best treated by multi-drug 
or multi-target therapies. Traditional medicines, such as traditional Chinese 
medicine (TCM) and Indian Ayurveda, have been re-evaluated and are becoming 
important resources for the discovery of bioactive molecules with therapeutic 
effects and for designing multi-targets drugs. This article provides an overview 
of new strategies and techniques to design therapeutic regimes that comprise 
more than one active ingredient to produce synergistic effects by simultaneously 
interacting with multiple molecular targets. Advances in phytochemistry, high 
throughput screening, DNA sequencing, systems biology, and bioinformatics can 
reveal the chemical composition and molecular mechanisms of TCM and together 
provide a new template for the early stages of drug discovery. Meanwhile, 
clinical knowledge of TCM provides a promising framework for multi-component 
drug design. A renaissance of multi-component drug discovery inspired by 
traditional medicine is possible.