Psidium guajava: A Single Plant for Multiple Health Problems of Rural Indian 
Population.

Daswani PG(1), Gholkar MS(1), Birdi TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Plants, The Foundation for Medical Research, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.

The rural population in India faces a number of health problems and often has to 
rely on local remedies. Psidium guajava Linn. (guava), a tropical plant which is 
used as food and medicine can be used by rural communities due to its several 
medicinal properties. A literature search was undertaken to gauge the rural 
health scenario in India and compile the available literature on guava so as to 
reflect its usage in the treatment of multiple health conditions prevalent in 
rural communities. Towards this, electronic databases such as Pubmed, Science 
Direct, google scholar were scanned. Information on clinical trials on guava was 
obtained from Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and 
Clinicaltrial.gov. The literature survey revealed that guava possesses various 
medicinal properties which have been reported from across the globe in the form 
of ethnobotanical/ethnopharmacological surveys, laboratory investigations and 
clinical trials. Besides documenting the safety of guava, the available 
literature shows that guava is efficacious against the following conditions 
which rural communities would encounter. (a) Gastrointestinal infections; (b) 
Malaria; (c)Respiratory infections; (d) Oral/dental infections; (e) Skin 
infections; (f) Diabetes; (g) Cardiovascular/hypertension; (h) Cancer; (i) 
Malnutrition; (j) Women problems; (k) Pain; (l) Fever; (m) Liver problems; (n) 
Kidney problems. In addition, guava can also be useful for treatment of animals 
and explored for its commercial applications. In conclusion, popularization of 
guava, can have multiple applications for rural communities.