Herbs in hemato-oncological care: an evidence-based review of data on efficacy, 
safety, and drug interactions.

Ben-Arye E(1), Attias S, Tadmor T, Schiff E.

Author information:
(1)Integrative Oncology Program, The Oncology Service and Lin Medical Center, 
Clalit Health Services, Haifa and Western Galilee District, Israel. 
eranben@netvision.net.il

Comment in
    Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Aug;51(8):1389-90.

Herbal remedies are clearly a complementary and alternative modality used 
frequently by patients with hemato-oncological neoplasias during the course of 
their specific treatment. This review focuses on the potential safety and 
efficacy of herbs which are either used often or even on a daily basis by 
patients with hematological malignancies or indicated in the herbal 
pharmacopeias utilized by various traditional systems of medicine, in order to 
improve the well-being of patients with these cancers. Traditional medicine 
worldwide is a source for ongoing laboratory research related to the activity of 
herbs on cultured cell lines derived from patients with leukemia, lymphoma, and 
myeloma. Although the number of clinical studies in the field of hemato-oncology 
is limited, there appears to be potential efficacy in studies of mistletoe 
(Viscum album), green tea, Indian and Middle-Eastern spices, and some 
traditional Chinese, American, and European herbs. In addition to the potential 
efficacy of herbs, safety issues are also reviewed here, particularly, the 
documented and potential side effects, herb-drug interactions, and matters of 
quality control. Based on the above issues, the authors suggest enhancing 
doctor-patient communication regarding herbal use by adopting a patient-centered 
attitude based on scientific perspective.
