Dillenia species: A review of the traditional uses, active constituents and 
pharmacological properties from pre-clinical studies.

Saiful Yazan L(1), Armania N.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biomedicine, Institute of Bioscience, Universiti 
Putra Malaysia , Selangor , Malaysia and.

CONTEXT: Dillenia (Dilleniaceae) is a genus of about 100 species of flowering 
plants in tropical and subtropical trees of Southern Asia, Australasia, and the 
Indian Ocean Islands. Until now, only eight Dillenia species have been reported 
to be used traditionally in different countries for various medical purposes. 
Out of eight species, D. pentagyna (Roxb), D. indica (Linn.) and D. suffruticosa 
(Griffith Ex. Hook. F. & Thomsom Martelli) have been reported to be used to 
treat cancerous growth.
OBJECTIVE: The present review explored and provided information on the 
therapeutic potential of Dillenia species.
METHODS: Comprehensive and relevant literature on the therapeutic potential of 
Dillenia species was gathered through electronic databases including Google 
Scholar, Scopus, PubMed, and books, without limiting the dates of publication.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The review demonstrated that only a few Dillenia species 
have been proven scientifically for their therapeutic potential in pre-clinical 
studies, including D. pentagyna, D. indica, D. papuana (Martelli), D. 
meliosmifolia (Hook. F. Ex. Thomsom) and D. suffruticosa (Griffith Ex Hook. F. & 
Thomson). A few species of Dillenia have undergone isolation and 
characterization of compounds with lupeol and betulinic acids having tremendous 
pharmacological potential. Dillenia species warrant further studies on their 
therapeutic potential, which may eventually lead to the development of new drug 
candidates for treatment of various diseases.
