Development of botanical principles for clinical use in cancer: where are we 
lacking?

Poojari RJ(1), Patil AG, Gota VS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research 
and Education in Cancer (ACTREC), Tata Memorial Centre, Kharghar, Navi Mumbai, 
India. drradhikapoojari@gmail.com

Development of drugs from plant sources (botanicals) for the treatment of cancer 
has not been successful in India, despite a plethora of medicinal plants and an 
equal number of experiments demonstrating anti-cancer activity of plant 
principles in vitro. There are several pitfalls in our approach to botanical 
drug development. Foremost is the lack of industry-academia collaborations in 
this field. Research goals in Indian academic institutions are generally 
short-term and mostly aimed at fulfilling the minimum requirements of a 
doctoral/MD or MPharm thesis. Secondly, quality assurance of herbal formulations 
is difficult to achieve and good manufacturing practices are expensive to 
implement. This could introduce bias during the biological evaluation of 
botanicals. A systematic approach covering a wide range of investigations 
including but not limited to mechanistic studies, potential herb-drug 
interactions, pharmacokinetics and bioavailability could help in the 
optimization of herbal formulations in the preclinical stage of development 
before they can be considered for clinical trials. Government initiatives such 
as Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathic have encouraged research in these 
areas, but are insufficient to promote focused and aggressive evaluation of 
potential herbs. Particular emphasis should be given to clinical 
pharmacokinetics, drug interactions and clinical trials in specific cancers for 
the evaluation of dosage, safety, efficacy and concomitant use with 
chemotherapy. Only such policies can result in meaningful evaluation of 
botanicals for cancer therapy.

