Creosote bush lignans for human disease treatment and prevention: Perspectives 
on combination therapy.

Gnabre J(1), Bates R(2), Huang RC(3).

Author information:
(1)Mal-4 Research Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Mudd Hall, Baltimore, MD, 
USA.

The medicinal properties of the most successful plant in the deserts of the 
western hemisphere, the creosote bush (Larrea tridentata), are evidenced by the 
long traditional usage of the plants by the Native Americans Indian tribes in 
Southwestern North America and the Amerindians from South America. The plant is 
rich in simple bisphenyl lignans and tricyclic lignans known as cyclolignans. 
These compounds are responsible for many of the pharmacological activities of 
extracts of the plants. Some of these activities, namely antiherpes, 
antioxidant, antifungal, and anti-inflammatory, were known a century ago. Only 
recently have further studies revealed other crucial activities of the same 
plant molecules as powerful agents against human immunodeficiency virus, human 
papillomavirus, cancer, neurodegenerative diseases, and symptoms of aging. 
Molecular mechanisms underlying the antiviral and anticancer activities have 
been elucidated and involve the inhibition of SP1 dependent gene transcription. 
This review summarizes the recent findings on creosote bush lignans. We 
introduce the concept of a cocktail of safe well-characterized natural products 
from the creosote bush that would represent a bridge between oriental herbal 
medicines and Western drug-based therapies.
