Total phenolics, antioxidant, antitumor, and enzyme inhibitory activity of 
Indian medicinal and aromatic plants extracted with different extraction 
methods.

Nile SH(1), Nile AS(2), Keum YS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bio-resources and Food Science, College of Life and 
Environmental Sciences, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143701, South Korea. 
nileshivraj@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Bio-resources and Food Science, College of Life and 
Environmental Sciences, Konkuk University, Seoul, 143701, South Korea.

The phenolic content, antioxidant, antitumor, and enzyme inhibitory activities 
of commonly used medicinal herbs from a Unani system of medicine were 
investigated using four different extraction methods. Among the plants studied, 
the Hyssopus officinalis L, Origanum vulgare L, and Portulaca oleracea L. 
extracts showed the highest amount of total phenolics (64.40, 60.35, and 
58.81 mg GAE/g) and revealed significant antioxidant activities. The plants also 
showed a maximum cytotoxic activity as indicated by H. officinalis (82%), O. 
vulgare (75%), and P. oleracea (72%) showed more than 70% cytotoxicity for 
breast cancer cells, 82% of the cells were dead at the concentration of 
500 mg/mL. The plants H. officinalis, P. oleracea, O. vulgare, and Rubia 
cordifolia L. revealed more than 80% inhibition towards xanthine oxidase and 
comprising maximum 70% of inhibition for superoxide dismutase. From results we 
conclude that there is a strong correlation between phenolic content, 
antioxidant, and enzyme inhibitory activity among these plants, indicating 
phenolics are the major compounds for these biological activities. Furthermore, 
this study provides the basis for the therapeutic importance of studied plants 
as latent inhibitors of oxidative stress and antitumor cell proliferation which 
correlate with the ethnobotanical data contained in the Unani system of 
medicine.
