This paper reviews the pharmacology of Indian medicinal plants, starting with 
the historical background of European work on the subject beginning as early as 
the 17th century, and tracing its history through the work of Sen and Bose in 
the 1930's, and Vakhil's historic 1949 paper on Sarpaghanda. The often crucial 
role of patient feedback in early discoveries is highlighted, as is the time lag 
between proof of pharmacological action and identification of the active 
principle, and subsequent elucidation of mechanism of action. In the case of 
Indian plants in the 20th century this process sometimes took almost 50 years. 
Reserpine and its mechanisms are given in detail, and its current relevance to 
public health discussed. The foundation of present day methods of pharmacology 
is briefly presented so the complexity of methods used to identify properties of 
Ayurveda derived drugs like forskolin and baicalein, and their bioavailability, 
may be better appreciated. Ayurveda derived anti-oxidants and their levels of 
action, immuno-modulators, particularly with respect to the NF-kB pathway and 
its implications for cancer control, are all considered. The example of curcumin 
derived from turmeric is explained in more detail, because of its role in cancer 
prevention. Finally, the paper emphasizes the importance of Ayurveda's concepts 
of rasayana as a form of dietary chemo-prevention; the significance of ahar, 
diet, in Ayurveda's aspiration to prevent disease and restore health thus 
becomes clear. Understood in this light, Ayurveda may transcend pharmacology as 
a treatment paradigm.
