Biotechnological interventions in Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal.

Singh P(1), Guleri R(1), Singh V(1), Kaur G(1), Kataria H(2), Singh B(1), Kaur 
G(1), Kaul SC(3), Wadhwa R(3), Pati PK(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biotechnology , Guru Nanak Dev University , Amritsar , Punjab 
, India.
(2)b Zentrum für Molekulare Neurobiologie , Universitätsklinikum 
Hamburg-Eppendorf , Martinistr. 52, 20246 Hamburg , Germany.
(3)c Cell Proliferation Research Group and DBT-AIST International Laboratory for 
Advanced Biomedicine , National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) , Tsukuba , Ibaraki 305 8562 , Japan.

Withania somnifera is one of the most valued plants and is extensively used in 
Indian, Unani, and African systems of traditional medicine. It possess a wide 
array of therapeutic properties including anti-arthritic, anti-aging, 
anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory, immunoregulatory, chemoprotective, 
cardioprotective, and recovery from neurodegenerative disorders. With the 
growing realization of benefits and associated challenges in the improvement of 
W. somnifera, studies on exploration of genetic and chemotypic variations, 
identification and characterization of important genes, and understanding the 
secondary metabolites production and their modulation has gained significant 
momentum. In recent years, several in vitro and in vivo preclinical studies have 
facilitated the validation of therapeutic potential of the phytochemicals 
derived from W. somnifera and have provided necessary impetus for gaining deeper 
insight into the mechanistic aspects involved in the mode of action of these 
important pharmaceutically active constituents. The present review highlights 
some of the current developments and future prospects of biotechnological 
intervention in this important medicinal plant.