First ayurvedic approach towards green drugs: anti cervical cancer-cell 
properties of Clerodendrum viscosum root extract.

Sun C, Nirmalananda S, Jenkins CE, Debnath S, Balambika R, Fata JE, Raja KS(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Chemistry, College of Staten Island/City University of New York, 
Staten Island, NY 10314, USA. Krishnaswami.Raja@csi.cuny.edu.

The concept of Ayurvedic expert guided drug discovery and development is defined 
and put to test systematically for the first time in literature. Western Science 
has explored only ~5% of the approximately 25,000 species of higher plants for 
drug leads. The ancient medical science of Ayurveda has however employed a much 
larger spectrum of plants for clinical treatment. Clerodendrum viscosum (CV), a 
commonly growing weed in the Indian subcontinent has been employed by S. 
Nirmalananda (Ayurvedic expert) for the treatment of cervical cancer. Here we 
isolate and characterize a water extract fraction (Cv-AP) from the root of CV 
and evaluate its anticervical cancer cell bioactivity. Our results indicate that 
Cv-AP possesses pro-apoptotic, anti-proliferative, and anti-migratory activity 
in a dose-dependent fashion against cervical cancer cell lines. In contrast, 
primary fibroblasts (control healthy cells), when exposed to similar 
concentrations of this extract, fail to undergo apoptosis and remain relatively 
unaffected. These findings suggest that Clerodendrum viscosum (CV) is a readily 
available source of components with potent anti-cancer activity and selective 
bioactivity against cervical cancer cells. The major component in CV-AP was 
identified as a glycoprotein via SDS Page and Concanavalin-A binding studies. 
This study serves to illustrate that systematic collaboration with Ayurveda is a 
practical and powerful strategy in drug discovery and development.
