In silico assay development for screening of tetracyclic triterpenoids as 
anticancer agents against human breast cancer cell line MCF7.

Prakash O(1), Ahmad A(2), Tripathi VK(3), Tandon S(2), Pant AB(3), Khan F(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic and Structural Biology Department, CSIR-Central Institute of 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Process Chemistry & Chemical Engineering Department, CSIR-Central Institute 
of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)In-vitro Toxicology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Experimental activity of a compound on cancer cell line/target is mostly 
analyzed in the form of percentage inhibition at different concentration 
gradient and time of incubation. In this study a statistical model has been 
developed referred as in silico assay using support vector regression model, 
which can act with change in concentration gradient and time of incubation. This 
model is a function of concentration gradient, treatment hour and independent 
components; which calculate the percentage inhibition in combination of above 
three components. This model is designed to screen tetracyclic triterpenoids 
active against human breast cancer cell line MCF7. The model has been 
statistically validated, checked for applicability domain and predicted results 
were reconfirmed by MTT assay, for example Oenotheranstrol derivatives, OenA & 
B. Computational SAR, target and docking studies were performed to understand 
the cytotoxic mechanism of action of Oenotheranstrol compounds. The proposed in 
silico assay model will work for specific chemical family for which it will be 
optimized. This model can be used to analyze growth kinetics pattern on 
different human cancer cell lines for designed compounds.

