Oral submucous fibrosis. The South African experience.

VanWyk CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Oral and Dental Research Institute, University of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, 
South Africa.

A review of research related to oral submucous fibrosis (OSF) among South 
Africans of Indian descent shows a certain uniqueness compared to other 
countries. In South Africa the betel habit is more common among women, only 60% 
of chewers prefer the betel quid while the rest like the nut by itself, the 
majority of chewers prefer the baked (black) nut variety and a minority add 
tobacco to their chew. This pattern reflects in the distribution of OSF and the 
practice of the habit by OSF subjects. Compared to chewers without OSF, OSF 
subjects are younger and have shorter histories of chewing. Yet the profile of 
systemic diseases were similar among subjects with and without OSF. The habit as 
practised in South Africa also determines the pattern of oral squamous 
carcinomas. They are more common in women, with buccal mucosa cancers being the 
most frequent. The latter are commonly found in subjects not using any tobacco, 
indicating the carcinogenicity of the areca nut. It was also shown that oral 
cancer can develop in chewers without an intermediate precancerous OSF phase. A 
follow-up of OSF cases after cessation of the habit revealed that once present 
the disease is permanent. An analysis of cultured OSF fibroblasts demonstrated a 
permanent shift to larger cells theoretically capable of producing larger 
amounts of collagen. Thus the agents in the nut could be the initiators of the 
disease and its permanent character the result of a phenotypic alteration in 
cells from changes in gene expression