Inhibition of benzopyrene-induced forestomach tumors by field bean protease 
inhibitor(s).

Fernandes AO(1), Banerji AP.

Author information:
(1)Biological Chemistry Division, Cancer Research Institute, Parel, Bombay, 
India.

Protease inhibitors (PIs), particularly the soybean-derived Bowman-Birk 
inhibitor, have proved to be powerful blockers of carcinogenesis in many in 
vitro and animal model systems. However, so far an ability of PIs to suppress 
gastric carcinogenesis has not been demonstrated, because of the anticipated 
'hostile' acidic gastric environment for the PI to exert its action. We 
therefore examined the ability of a purified PI from the Indian legume the field 
bean (FBPI), when administered by gavage, to subdue benzopyrene (BP)-induced 
neoplasia of the forestomach of mice. Forestomach tumors were produced in female 
Swiss albino mice by oral administration of BP at a dose of 1 mg twice weekly 
for 4 weeks. Groups of mice were treated per os with an aqueous solution of FBPI 
for 3 months or more at a dose of 20 mg/kg once daily, six times a week, either 
from the initiation of carcinogenesis or after completion of the carcinogen 
treatment. Another group was treated likewise with autoclaved inactive FBPI. 
Mice of both the FBPI-treated groups showed statistically significant (P < 
0.001) reductions in the multiplicity of gastric tumors, with the tumor 
incidence being unaffected. However, the suppression of tumor multiplicity was 
appreciably (P < 0.01) more in the group that received FBPI treatment 
concomitantly with the carcinogen. The mice that were treated with 
heat-inactivated FBPI showed similar tumor multiplicity to the BP-treated group, 
indicating that the oncopreventive activity of FBPI is related to its protease 
inhibitory capacity. These observations point to the potential of PIs as 
effective chemoprotectors against gastric cancer in animals and, possibly, in 
humans as well.