Mutations and polymorphisms in the p53, p21 and p16 genes in oral carcinomas of 
Indian betel quid chewers.

Heinzel PA(1), Balaram P, Bernard HU.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, National University of Singapore.

India has one of the world's highest incidences of oral cancer. It is believed 
that the widespread habit of betel quid chewing is an important risk factor as 
it exposes the oral mucosa to known carcinogens. It also induces physical 
abrasions, which may create mitogenic environments during wound healing as 
gateways for infections. A recent study from our laboratories identified human 
papillomavirus (HPV) DNA, mostly of the high-risk types HPV-16 and HPV-18, in 67 
of 91 oral cancer lesions from a cohort of Indian patients consisting mostly of 
betel quid users. This suggested a viral etiology of some lesions but 
tumorigenesis in the absence of viruses in other lesions. Here, we examined 
whether the p53 gene, whose function is abrogated by the product of the HPV gene 
E6, would be mutated in those oral cancers that were free of HPV DNA, and we 
found point mutations at known hot spots for mutational alteration of p53 in 4 
of 23 lesions. We also considered the possibility that p21, a target of 
regulation by the p53 protein, may be mutationally altered in tumors with a 
functional p53 gene. While we did not identify mutations in the p21 gene, 6 of 
11 lesions contained a polymorphism that may be associated with cancer. 
Interestingly, 3 of 23 lesions had mutations in the p16 gene, a third regulator 
of the cell cycle which is frequently mutated in melanoma but rarely in other 
cancers, with 1 lesion even having a mutation in the p53 as well as in the p16 
gene. Our data point to p53 and p16 as gene targets of oral carcinogenesis, with 
chemicals in the betel quid possibly functioning in these tumors as carcinogens.

