Epidemiological survey of oral submucous fibrosis in Xiangtan City, Hunan 
Province, China.

Tang JG(1), Jian XF, Gao ML, Ling TY, Zhang KH.

Author information:
(1)Stomatological Hospital, Xiangtan City, China.

Oral submucous fibrosis is a high risk precancerous condition and is suggested 
to be caused by areca nut chewing. Areca nut chewing is popular in Hunan 
Province of China, and is more concentrated in Xiangtan City. Two and nine cases 
of oral submucous fibrosis (OSF) were first noticed in 1984 and 1985 
respectively, and an epidemiologic survey was subsequently performed in 1986. 
The epidermiologic method of cluster sampling was used. The Yuhu District, one 
of the five urban districts of the Xiangtan City with a population of 100,000 
was selected as a whole body in the survey, 57 independent units of various 
professions were randomly selected as group samples and more than 70% of 
subjects in each unit were examined. Definite fibrous band on palpation was used 
as a main diagnostic criterion for OSF. A total of 11046 individuals were 
examined; among them were 3907 areca nut chewers (35.37%) and 7139 non-chewers 
(64.63%). 335 cases of OSF were found, comprising a prevalence rate of 3.03%. 
The disease involved mainly the middle third of the oral cavity. All of the OSF 
cases were areca nut chewers. No case had been found in non-chewers. Four cases 
of oral carcinoma were found on the basis of OSF, the malignant transformation 
rate was 1.19%. The high prevalence of OSF may be due to areca nut chewing plus 
extensive and heavy use of hot pepper in Xiangtan people. The result supports 
the role of the areca nut as an etiologic factor in the development of OSF. The 
low malignant transformation rate of 1.19% compared with the 7.6% in an Indian 
report may be because Xiangtan people chew areca nut without tobacco.
