Sesquiterpene lactones specifically inhibit activation of NF-kappa B by 
preventing the degradation of I kappa B-alpha and I kappa B-beta.

Hehner SP(1), Heinrich M, Bork PM, Vogt M, Ratter F, Lehmann V, Schulze-Osthoff 
K, Dröge W, Schmitz ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunochemistry, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 
Heidelberg, Germany.

Extracts from certain Mexican Indian medicinal plants used in traditional 
indigenous medicine for the treatment of inflammations contain sequiterpene 
lactones (SLs), which specifically inhibit the transcription factor NF-kappa B 
(Bork, P. M., Schmitz, M. L., Kuhnt, M., Escher, C., and Heinrich, M. (1997) 
FEBS Lett. 402, 85-90). Here we show that SLs prevented the activation of 
NF-kappa B by different stimuli such as phorbol esters, tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha, ligation of the T-cell receptor, and hydrogen peroxide in various 
cell types. Treatment of cells with SLs prevented the induced degradation of I 
kappa B-alpha and I kappa B-beta by all these stimuli, suggesting that they 
interfere with a rather common step in the activation of NF-kappa B. SLs did 
neither interfere with DNA binding activity of activated NF-kappa B nor with the 
activity of the protein tyrosine kinases p59fyn and p60arc. Micromolar amounts 
of SLs prevented the induced expression of the NF-kappa B target gene 
intracellular adhesion molecule 1. Inhibition of NF-kappa B by SLs resulted in 
an enhanced cell killing of murine fibroblast cells by tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha. SLs lacking an exomethylene group in conjugation with the lactone 
function displayed no inhibitory activity on NF-kappa B. The analysis of the 
cellular redox state by fluorescence-activated cell sorter showed that the SLs 
had no direct or indirect anti-oxidant properties.