Mol Carcinog. 2008 Dec;47(12):916-24. doi: 10.1002/mc.20442.

Regulation of signaling pathways involved in lupeol induced inhibition of 
proliferation and induction of apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells.

Prasad S(1), Nigam N, Kalra N, Shukla Y.

Author information:
(1)Proteomics Laboratory, Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow, 
India.

Retraction in
    Mol Carcinog. 2020 Jun;59(6):670.

Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed noncutaneous cancer and 
the leading cause of cancer related deaths in men in the United States and many 
other Asian countries. Dietary factors are considered as a strategic agent to 
control the risk of PCa. Lupeol, a triterpene, present in fruits and medicinal 
plants, has been shown to possess many pharmacological properties including 
anticancer effects. Here, effect of lupeol on cell proliferation and cell death 
was evaluated using human PCa cells, PC-3. In MTT assay, lupeol inhibited the 
cell proliferation (12-71%) in dose (50-800 microM) and time dependent manner. 
Flow-cytometric analysis of cell-cycle revealed that an antiproliferative effect 
of lupeol (400-600 microM) is associated with an increase in G(2)/M-phase arrest 
(34-58%). RT-PCR analysis showed that lupeol-induced G2/M-phase arrest was 
mediated through the inhibition of cyclin regulated signaling pathway. Lupeol 
inhibited the expression of cyclin B, cdc25C, and plk1 but induced the 
expression of 14-3-3sigma genes. However no changes were observed in the 
expression of gadd45, p21(waf1/cip1) and cdc2 genes. Results of western blot 
showed that lupeol regulates the phosphorylation of cdc2 (Tyr15) and cdc25C 
(Ser198). Further, on increase of lupeol exposure to PC-3 cells an induction of 
apoptosis was recorded, which was associated with upregulation of bax, 
caspase-3, -9, and apaf1 genes and down regulation of antiapoptotic bcl-2 gene. 
The role of caspase-induced apoptosis was confirmed by increase in reactive 
oxygen species, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential followed by DNA 
fragmentation. Thus, our study suggests that lupeol possess novel 
antiproliferative and apoptotic potential against PCa.