Effect of precursors feeding and media manipulation on production of novel 
anticancer pro-drug camptothecin from endophytic fungus.

Amna T(1), Amina M, Sharma PR, Puri SC, Al-Youssef HM, Al-Taweel AM, Qazi GN.

Author information:
(1)Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine (Formerly Regional Research 
Laboratory) , Canal Road, Jammu Tawi- 18001 , India ; Department of 
Pharmacognosy, College of pharmacy, King Saud University , Riyadh, 11451 , Saudi 
Arabia.

We have established methodology for the isolation and characterization of a 
novel endophytic fungus from the inner bark of medicinal plant Nothapodytes 
foetida, which produced camptothecin in Sabouraud broth (SB) under shake flask 
conditions. Camptothecin and its related compounds are at present obtained by 
extraction from intact plants, but fungal endopytes may be an alternative source 
of production. In present study we have observed the effect of different 
nutrient combinations and precursors (tryptophan, tryptamine, geraniol, citral, 
mevalonic acid and leucine) on the accumulation of camptothecin by endophytic 
fungus Entrophospora infrequens. The precursors were fed either alone or in 
combinations (tryptophan and geraniol, tryptophan and citral, tryptophan and 
mevalonic acid, tryptophan and leucine). The highest camptothecin content was 
observed in the range of 503 ± 25µg/100g dry cell mass in Sabouraud medium. 
Camptothecin content in the medium was increased by 2.5 folds by the presence of 
tryptophan and leucine whereas the production with trytophan was also 
significantly different from other treatments. Furthermore, the effect of fungal 
camptothecin on the morphology of human cancer cell lines was also studied. The 
treated cells showed reduction in size, condensation of nucleus and the 
protoplasmic extensions were reduced. All these characteristics are found in 
apoptotic cells.

