Diet and oral premalignancy in female south Indian tobacco and betel chewers: a 
case-control study.

Carley KW(1), Puttaiah R, Alvarez JO, Heimburger DC, Anantha N.

Author information:
(1)Department of International Health, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL 35294-0008, USA.

The diets of 158 tobacco/betel quid-chewing women diagnosed with oral 
premalignant lesions and 155 quid-chewing but lesion-free controls, frequency 
matched for age, tobacco/betel habits, and socioeconomic status, were assessed 
using a food frequency survey. Index scores generated from the food frequency 
survey indicated that the mean levels of consumption for foods of animal origin 
(p < 0.001), total vegetables and fruit (p = 0.001), vegetables alone (p = 
0.006), fruits alone (p = 0.006), and green leafy vegetables (p = 0.015) were 
significantly lower in cases than in controls. The mean index score for 
cobalamin (vitamin B12) was lower in cases with a borderline significance (p = 
0.05), whereas the indexes for folate and carotene were not significantly 
different. The analysis of index scores estimating the number of 100-g servings 
per week of foods of animal origin [meat, eggs, milk, curd (yogurt), fish] 
consumed revealed that women who ate fewer servings were more likely to have 
premalignant lesions than those who ate more animal foods [odds ratio (OR) 3.38, 
95% confidence interval (CI) 2.07-5.54, p = 0.001]. The risk for low consumption 
of vegetables was not as significant as that for foods of animal origin. 
However, those eating low levels of vegetables and low levels of foods of animal 
origin were at the greatest risk for lesions (OR 5.38, 95% CI 1.72-22.17, p < 
0.05). In South Indian female tobacco/betel chewers, a diet deficient in foods 
of animal origin appears to be a more significant risk factor for oral 
premalignancy than is a diet deficient in fruits and vegetables.