Multiple Targets Directed Multiple Ligands: An In Silico and In Vitro Approach 
to Evaluating the Effect of Triphala on Angiogenesis.

Abhinand CS(1), Athira PA(2), Soumya SJ(2), Sudhakaran PR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, University of Kerala, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.
(2)Inter-University Centre for Genomics and Gene Technology, University of 
Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala, India.

Angiogenesis is critical in both physiological and pathological conditions and 
targeting angiogenesis is a promising strategy for the development of therapies 
against cancer; however, cells develop resistance to anti-angiogenic therapy, 
necessitating a more effective strategy. Natural medicines have been used in 
anti-cancer therapy for many years, but the mechanisms behind these have not 
generally been explored. Triphala churna (THL), an Indian ayurvedic herbal 
formulation made from the dried fruits of three medicinal plants, is used as a 
herbal drug for the treatment of various diseases, including cancer. THL 
contains over fifteen phytochemicals with different pharmacological effects, 
especially inhibition of tumor progression. In this study, we examined the 
effect of these compounds against different targets using docking and in vitro 
studies. Results showed that THL has a prediction efficacy of (-436.7), and it 
inhibited angiogenesis by blocking multiple components of the VEGF/VEGFR2 
signaling pathway. The anti-angiogenic effect was mediated by the combined 
effect of the two top ranked phytochemicals, punicalagin (-424.8) and chebulagic 
acid (-414.8). The new approach developed in this study to determine the 
potential efficacy of herbal formulation could be a useful strategy to assess 
the efficacy of different herbal formulations.

