Protective effect of dietary phytochemicals against arsenite induced 
genotoxicity in mammalian V79 cells.

Roy M(1), Sinha D, Mukherjee S, Paul S, Bhattacharya RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis and Toxicology, Chittaranjan 
National Cancer Institute, 37, S P Mukherjee Road, Kolkata 700 026, India. 
mitacnci@yahoo.co.in

Chronic arsenic exposure causes skin diseases, gastrointestinal and neurological 
disorders, diabetes and cancer in various organs. Oxidative stress associated 
with arsenic exposure cause genetic instabilities and may initiate 
carcinogenesis. Phytochemicals present in vegetables, fruits, spices, tea, and 
medicinal plants, have shown to suppress experimental carcinogenesis in various 
organs. The aim of the present study was to elucidate the protective effect of 
some of the phytochemicals against the arsenite induced DNA damage in normal 
mammalian V79 cells. Comet assay was used for assessment of DNA damage and 2', 
7'-dichlorofluorescein dihydroacetate for estimation of ROS generated by 
arsenite. The effect of the phytochemicals was observed during simultaneous 
treatment with arsenic, before arsenite exposure and during repair experiments. 
Of all the phytochemicals tested against arsenic, curcumin gave better 
protection during simultaneous treatment and resveratrol during pre treatment, 
which was evident both from comet assay and ROS generation experiments. During 
pre treatment a longer duration of treatment with lower dose of phytochemicals 
proved fruitful in reducing the genotoxicity. During repair experiments the 
phytochemicals enhanced recovery of DNA damage and ellagic acid gave promising 
results. The results indicated that natural phytochemicals may have the efficacy 
in reducing arsenic induced genotoxicity, in scavenging ROS and in enhancing the 
process of DNA repair in V79 cells.
