Human papillomaviruses in 91 oral cancers from Indian betel quid chewers--high 
prevalence and multiplicity of infections.

Balaram P(1), Nalinakumari KR, Abraham E, Balan A, Hareendran NK, Bernard HU, 
Chan SY.

Author information:
(1)Regional Cancer Centre, Medical College Hospital, Trivandrum, India.

India has one of the world's highest incidences of oral cancer. The habit of 
chewing betel quid is widespread and is suspected to play a role in the etiology 
of this disease. Studies in many other countries have also pointed to a role for 
human papilloma-viruses (HPVs) in the etiology of some oral cancers. In this 
study we analyzed biopsies from 91 Indian oral cancer patients, most of whom 
were betel quid chewers, by PCR amplification and direct DNA sequencing. HPV DNA 
was detected in 74% of these lesions, of which 41% had multiple HPV infections. 
Among the lesions from different oral sites, lesions of the tongue had the 
highest rate (9 of 11) of HPV infection. These HPV prevalences are among the 
highest ever reported in oral cancers. As to individual HPV types, prevalences 
of HPV-6, HPV-11, HPV-16 and HPV-18 were 13%, 20%, 42% and 47%, respectively. No 
additional known or novel HPV types were detected. To understand the 
unexpectedly high prevalences of the "low-risk" types HPV-6 and HPV-11, we 
compared the subtypes and variants that were found in oral cancers against those 
from benign genital warts from the same patient population but found no 
differences. The high prevalence of HPV in the oral cancers of these Indian 
patients suggests that viral infection is an important etiological component, 
with betel quid probably causing additional mutagenic steps in the carcinogenic 
process.
