Glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1 null genotypes as risk factors for oral 
leukoplakia in ethnic Indian betel quid/tobacco chewers.

Nair UJ(1), Nair J, Mathew B, Bartsch H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Toxicology and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research 
Center, Heidelberg.

Oral cancer is the most common cancer in males and third most common in females 
in India, the main causative agent being the use of chewing tobacco with or 
without betel quid (BQ). However, nothing is known about the role of the host 
metabolic genes in oral cancer in ethnic Indian population. In this study, the 
prevalence of GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes (GSTM1*2 and GSTT1*2) in oral 
premalignant leukoplakia cases and controls was ascertained in genomic DNA by a 
multiplex PCR technique. Biopsies taken from 98 oral leukoplakia patients and 
exfoliated cells from 82 healthy controls both of Indian ethnicity were 
analysed. GSTM1*1 (active) was present in 83% and GSTT1*1 (active) was present 
in 78% of all control subjects, while prevalence of GSTM1*2 and GSTT1*2 null 
genotypes was significantly higher among oral leukoplakia cases. The prevalence 
of GSTM1*2 in leukoplakia cases was 81.6% compared with 17% in controls [odds 
ratio (OR), 22; 95% confidence interval (CI), 1047] and GSTT1*2 was 75.5% in the 
cases versus 22% in controls (OR, 11; 95% CI, 5-22). Combined null genotypes of 
GSTM1 and GSTT1 prevailed in 60.2% of the cases with none detected in controls. 
Glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1 enzymes are both known to catalyse 
detoxification of reactive oxygen species, lipid peroxidation products and 
tobacco-derived carcinogens that have been found in the saliva of BQ/tobacco 
chewers. Our results, still requiring confirmation by a larger study, 
demonstrate that the null genotypes of both GSTM1 and GSTT1 increase with high 
penetrance, separately or in combination, the risk for developing leukoplakia in 
an Indian ethnic population.
