Antiplasmodial potential of extracts from two species of genus Blumea.

Upadhyay HC(1), Sisodia BS, Verma RK, Darokar MP, Srivastava SK.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Chemistry Department, Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic 
Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), Lucknow, India.

CONTEXT: A number of Blumea (Asteraceae) species are being used in traditional 
Chinese and Indian folklore medicines to cure various diseases including cancer, 
fungal and bacterial infections.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the in vitro antiplasmodial potential and cytotoxicity of 
various extracts and fractions of B. membranacea DC and B. eriantha DC and high 
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) chemical fingerprinting of their crude 
extracts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The aerial parts and roots of B. membranacea and B. 
eriantha were extracted with ethanol and the extracts were successively 
partitioned with n-hexane, ethyl acetate and n-butanol, which were later 
evaluated for their in vitro antiplasmodial activity against Plasmodium 
falciparum NF-54 and in vitro cytotoxicities against non-cancerous Vero cell 
line. HPLC chemical fingerprinting was performed on extracts of B. membranacea 
and B. eriantha.
RESULTS: The n-hexane (MA1), ethyl acetate (MA2) fractions of aerial parts and 
n-butanol (MR3) fraction of roots of B. membranacea showed IC50 values of 17.4, 
19.0 and 3.3 µg/mL respectively, while the n-hexane (EA1), ethyl acetate (EA2) 
fractions of aerial parts and ethyl acetate (ER2) fraction of roots of B. 
eriantha showed IC50 values of 25.0, 26.5 and 15.6 µg/mL, respectively, against 
P. falciparum NF-54. All these fractions were non-toxic to Vero cells.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Both B. membranacea and B. eriantha possesses a high 
degree of selective antiplasmodial activity (selectivity index up to >60) and 
hence, may find their use in antimalarial phytopharmaceuticals as well as in 
discovery of a safer and novel antimalarial lead.
