Antiproliferative activity of diarylnaphthylpyrrolidine derivative via dual 
target inhibition.

Verma AK(1), Fatima K(2), Dudi RK(3), Tabassum M(3), Iqbal H(1), Kumar Y(2), 
Luqman S(2), Mondhe DM(4), Chanda D(2), Khan F(2), Shanker K(2), Negi AS(5).

Author information:
(1)CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), P.O. 
CIMAP, Kukrail Picnic Spot Road, Lucknow, 226 015, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), P.O. 
CIMAP, Kukrail Picnic Spot Road, Lucknow, 226 015, Uttar Pradesh, India; Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, 201002, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.
(3)CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine (CSIR-IIIM), Canal Road, Jammu, 
180001, India.
(4)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, 201002, 
Uttar Pradesh, India; CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine (CSIR-IIIM), 
Canal Road, Jammu, 180001, India.
(5)CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), P.O. 
CIMAP, Kukrail Picnic Spot Road, Lucknow, 226 015, Uttar Pradesh, India; Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Ghaziabad, 201002, Uttar Pradesh, 
India. Electronic address: arvindcimap@rediffmail.com.

Breast cancer is the second leading cause of deaths in women globally. Present 
communication deals with design and synthesis of a few diarylnaphthyls as 
possible anti-breast cancer agents. Among the thirty three representatives with 
significant antiproliferative activity compounds 23 and 50 were quite 
efficacious against human breast cancer cells. Compound 50 induced apoptosis in 
both MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells and exerted S phase and G2/M phase arrest 
respectively via distinct mechanistic pathways. It showed moderate microtubule 
destabilization. Further, it exhibited DNA topoisomerase-II inhibition effect in 
MCF-7 cells. It was well tolerable and found safe up to 300 mg/kg dose in Swiss 
albino mice. The dual action antiproliferative effect of compound 50 is quite 
interesting and warrants for future development.
