Antineoplastic agents. 522. Hernandia peltata (Malaysia) and Hernandia 
nymphaeifolia (Republic of Maldives).

Pettit GR(1), Meng Y, Gearing RP, Herald DL, Pettit RK, Doubek DL, Chapuis JC, 
Tackett LP.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Research Institute and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 
Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287-2404, USA. bpettit@asu.edu

Bioassay (P388 lymphocytic leukemia cell line and human tumor cell lines)-guided 
separation of the extracts prepared from the tropical and coastal trees 
Hernandia peltata (Malaysia) and Hernandianymphaeifolia (Republic of Maldives) 
led to the isolation of a new lignan designated as hernanol (1) and 12 
previously known lignans: (-)-deoxypodophyllotoxin (2), deoxypicropodophyllin 
(3), (+)-epiaschantin (4), (+)-epieudesmin (5), praderin (6), 5'-methoxyyatein 
(7), podorhizol (8), deoxypodorhizone (9), bursehernin (10), kusunokinol (11), 
clusin (12), and (-)-maculatin (13). The oxidative cyclization (with VOF(3)) of 
lignans 8, 9, and 10 resulted in a new and unusual benzopyran (14), isostegane 
(15), and a new dibenzocyclooctadiene lactone (16), respectively. The structure 
and relative stereochemistry of hernanol (1) and lignans 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 
12 were determined by 1D and 2DNMR and HRMS analyses. The structures and 
absolute stereochemistry of structures 2, 4, 5, 6, 13, 14, 15, and 16 were 
unequivocally determined by single-crystal X-ray diffraction analyses. 
Evaluation against the murine P388 lymphocytic leukemia cell line and human 
tumor cell lines showed podophyllotoxin derivatives 2 and 3 to be strong cancer 
cell line growth inhibitors and substances 4, 5, 8, and 15 to have marginal 
cancer cell line inhibitory activities. Seven of the lignans and one of the 
synthetic modifications (14) inhibited growth of the pathogenic bacterium 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae