MDM2/p53 co-expression in oral premalignant and malignant lesions: potential 
prognostic implications.

Agarwal S(1), Mathur M, Srivastava A, Ralhan R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari 
Nagar, New Delhi, India.

The expression of MDM2 protein in betel and tobacco related oral malignancies in 
Indian population, its relationship to clinicopathological parameters and p53 
protein expression was investigated. Sixty five oral squamous cell carcinomas 
(SCCs), 33 premalignant lesions (leukoplakia) and 30 normal oral tissues were 
assessed by immunohistochemical analysis. MDM2 protein was overexpressed in 
51/65 (78%) oral SCCs and 17/33 (52%) premalignant lesions; 11/23 hyperplastic 
lesions and 6/10 dysplastic lesions. mdm2 gene amplification is an infrequent 
event in oral tumorigenesis. Elevation in the level of MDM2 protein not only in 
oral SCCs but also in premalignant lesions suggests that altered MDM2 expression 
is an early even in the pathogenesis of oral neoplasia. The hallmark of the 
study was the significant association of MDM2 expression with the p53 protein 
accumulation in 16/33 (49%) oral premalignant lesions (p = 0.001) and 39/65 
(60%) malignant lesions (p = 0.021), suggesting an active role for MDM2 in 
binding and inactivating p53 in oral tumorigenesis. Further, significant 
association of MDM2/p53 co-expression was observed with advanced tumour stage (p 
= 0.0009), as well as lymph node metastasis (p = 0.0325) features associated 
with aggressive tumour behaviour and poor prognosis. Discordant 
MDM2+/p53-phenotype was observed in 12/65 (18%) oral SCCs suggesting a 
p53-independent role for MDM2 in the pathogenesis of a subset of oral 
carcinomas. In conclusion, alterations in MDM2 and p53 expression are early 
events likely to be involved in preinvasive stages in oral tumorigenesis and may 
be indicative of a 'gain of function' phenotype with more aggressive 
characteristics.