Oral lesions, genotoxicity and nitrosamines in betel quid chewers with no 
obvious increase in oral cancer risk.

Stich HF, Rosin MP, Brunnemann KD.

A link between the generation of areca nut-related N-nitrosamines in the saliva, 
the induction of genotoxic damage in the oral mucosa, as judged by an increase 
in micronucleated exfoliated cells (MEC), and a low incidence of oral cancer was 
studied in 2 population groups characterized by their habit of chewing quids 
without tobacco: Guamanians, who chew areca nuts (Areca catechu) with or without 
the addition of betel leaf (Piper betle); Taiwanese, who use areca nut, betel 
leaf or inference and slaked lime. The levels of N-nitrosoguvacoline (NG) in the 
saliva of chewers of fresh green areca nuts were very high (70.8 ng/ml) as 
compared to those reported for individuals using the more complex Indian betel 
quids (0.91 ng/ml or 5.6 ng/ml). None of the other areca nut-related 
nitrosamines (N-nitrosoguvacine (NGC), 3-(methylnitrosamino)propionitrile (MNPN) 
and 3-(methylnitrosamino)propionaldehyde (MNPA)) were detected in the saliva of 
Taiwanese betel quid chewers. The addition of slaked lime to the areca nut 
enhances the formation of NG during a chewing session. The frequency of MEC did 
not increase in the oral mucosa of areca nut chewers who do not use slaked lime, 
but showed a small but significant elevation in individuals using 
lime-containing quids. The elevation of MEC in Taiwanese, who are at low risk 
for oral cancer, is relatively small as compared to that found in chewers of 
Indian betel quids (pan), who show a highly elevated oral cancer risk. The 
results seem to suggest that NG may play only a minor role, if any, in the 
etiology of oral cancer among betel quid chewers.
