Anti-diabetic effect of a combination of andrographolide-enriched extract of 
Andrographis paniculata (Burm f.) Nees and asiaticoside-enriched extract of 
Centella asiatica L. in high fructose-fat fed rats.

Nugroho AE(1), Lindawati NY(2), Herlyanti K(2), Widyastuti L(2), Pramono S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universitas Gadjah Mada, Jogjakarta, Indonesia, 55281. 
agungendronugroho@yahoo.com
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universitas Gadjah Mada, Jogjakarta, Indonesia, 55281.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Gadjah 
Mada, Jogjakarta, Indonesia, 55281.

Traditionally, a combination of medicinal plants is commonly used for lowering 
blood glucose in diabetic patients in order to provide additional benefits of 
the single drug. A. paniculata and C. asiatica are two traditional medicines 
form South Asian and Southeast Asain countries consumed by people for treating 
daibates mellitus and its complications. Hyperglycemia in the rats was 
stimulated by high fructose-fat diet that consists of 36% fructose, 15% lard, 
and 5% egg yolks in 0.36 g/200 g body weight for 70 days. The rats were orally 
administered with the combination of andrographolide-enriched extract of A. 
paniculata (AEEAP) leaves and asiaticoside-enriched extract of C. asiatica 
(AEECA) herbs from day 70 for 7 days. Antidiabetic activity was evaluated by 
estimating mainly the blood glucose levels and other parameters such as HDL, 
LDL, cholesterol and triglyceride. The results showed that combination at the 
ratio of 70:30 exhibited a promosing antidiabetic effect in 
high-fat-fructose-fed rat, and exhibited sinergistic effects on blood 
cholesterol and HDL levels. It can be concluded that its antidiabetic effect was 
better than that of single treatment of AEEAP or AEECA. That combination was 
also potential to develop as a blood glucose-lowering agent for diabetic 
patients.