Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM) improved neurobehavioral deficits following acute 
ischemic stroke by attenuating neuroinflammatory response.

Jhelum P(1), Wahul AB(1), Kamle A(2), Kumawat S(2), Kumar A(2), Bhutani KK(3), 
Tripathi SM(4), Chakravarty S(5).

Author information:
(1)Chemical Biology, CSIR - Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka, 
Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India.
(2)CSIR - Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Habsiguda, Uppal Road, 
Hyderabad 500007, India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceuticals, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research (NIPER), Mohali, Chandigarh 500037, India.
(4)Department of Pharmaceuticals, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research (NIPER), Mohali, Chandigarh 500037, India. Electronic address: 
drsmtripathi5@gmail.com.
(5)Chemical Biology, CSIR - Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Tarnaka, 
Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India. Electronic address: sumana98@gmail.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Cerebral ischemic stroke is one of the leading 
causes of death and long-term disability worldwide. Unfortunately, due to the 
failure of most of drugs in clinical trials recently, attentions have moved 
towards the traditional system of medicines including Ayurveda. In Ayurveda, 
Sameerpannag Ras (SR) is a mineral and metallic origin based formulation which 
has been used for the treatment of arthritis and chronic systematic inflammatory 
disorder. The current study was designed to investigate the neuroprotective 
effects of Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM), on the neurobehavioral dysfunction 
and associated neuroinflammation, induced by transient Internal Carotid Artery 
Occlusion (ICAO) in mice model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present study, mice were treated with Sameerpannag 
Ras Mixture (SRM) at the dose of 40mg/kg body weight by oral gavages for 3 and 
7days respectively, twice a day, after the induction of ICAO for 90min followed 
by reperfusion. The efficacy of SRM was examined by scoring neurological 
behavioral deficit using the standard neurological deficit score (NDS), grip 
strength and rotarod performance tests at different time intervals of post-ICAO.
RESULTS: Post-ischemic treatment with Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM) at 40mg/kg 
significantly reduced Neurological Deficit Score and improved the motor 
coordination at different time intervals post-ICAO. The analysis of RT-qPCR data 
showed that transient cerebral ischemia could induce the inflammatory response 
genes in the affected striatal region of ICAO group, as compared to sham group, 
on day3 and day7 post-ICAO. Interestingly, SRM treatment showed marked 
improvement in the ischemia-induced neurobehavioral deficits by attenuating 
ischemia-induced neuroinflammatory response at both gene and protein level.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that Sameerpannag Ras Mixture (SRM) 
treatment ameliorates behavioral outcomes after mild ischemia through the 
suppression of a number of inflammatory response genes involved in neuronal 
damage. This is the first report of the molecular mechanism underlying the 
significant neuroprotective action of the Ayurvedic drug, Sameerpannag Ras 
Mixture (SRM), using a mild stroke in mice model.