Ampelozyziphus amazonicus Ducke (Rhamnaceae), a medicinal plant used to prevent 
malaria in the Amazon Region, hampers the development of Plasmodium berghei 
sporozoites.

Andrade-Neto VF(1), Brandão MG, Nogueira F, Rosário VE, Krettli AU.

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Malária, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou/FIOCRUZ, Av. Augusto 
de Lima 1715, CEP 30190-002, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

Most medicinal plants used against malaria in endemic areas aim to treat the 
acute symptoms of the disease such as high temperature fevers with periodicity 
and chills. In some endemic areas of the Brazilian Amazon region one medicinal 
plant seems to be an exception: Ampelozyziphus amazonicus, locally named "Indian 
beer" or "Saracura-mira", used to prevent the disease when taken daily as a cold 
suspension of powdered dried roots. In previous work we found no activity of the 
plant extracts against malaria blood parasites in experimentally infected 
animals (mice and chickens) or in cultures of Plasmodium falciparum. However, in 
infections induced by sporozoites, chickens treated with plant extracts were 
partially protected against Plasmodium gallinaceum and showed reduced numbers of 
exoerythrocytic forms in the brain. We now present stronger evidence that the 
ethanolic extract of "Indian beer" roots hampers in vitro and in vivo 
development of Plasmodium berghei sporozoites, a rodent malaria parasite. Some 
mice treated with high doses of the plant extract did not become infected after 
sporozoite inoculation, whereas others had a delayed prepatent period and lower 
parasitemia. Our data validates the use of "Indian beer" as a remedy for malaria 
prophylaxis in the Amazon, where the plant exists and the disease represents an 
important problem which is difficult to control. Studies aiming to identify the 
active compounds responsible for the herein described causal prophylactic 
activity are needed and may lead to a new antimalarial prophylactic.