
OBJECTIVE: Measurement of glucose uptake into peripheral tissue is an important 
mechanism to assess Insulin sensitivity. The present in vitro study was 
conducted to evaluate the Insulin sensitizing activity of Phyllanthus emblica 
(Pe), Tinospora cordifolia (Tc) and Curcuma longa (Cl) by assessing glucose 
uptake activity in a 3T3L1 adipocyte model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The 3T3 L1 fibroblast cells were differentiated to 
adipocytes, using a cocktail of insulin, isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and 
dexamethazone. These adipocytes were initially treated with different 
concentrations of the selected plants following which 2-deoxy glucose uptake was 
estimated using a radioactive assay. The effects of plants on glucose uptake 
both in the presence and absence of insulin was evaluated and compared with 
pioglitazone, a known insulin sensitizer.
RESULTS: Pe and Tc per se significantly stimulated glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 
adipocytes in a dose dependent manner with maximal effect at higher 
concentrations (200 µg/ml). The effect of both Pe and Tc at 200 µg/ml was 
comparable to insulin and greater than pioglitazone. Cl per se stimulated 
glucose uptake with maximal effect at 50 µg/ml. However, this effect was lesser 
as compared to insulin with higher concentrations inhibiting glucose uptake. 
When combined with insulin, an antagonist effect was observed between Pe, Tc and 
insulin indicating a possible plant-drug interaction while Cl in combination 
with insulin showed an increase in the glucose uptake as compared to Cl alone.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that one of the mechanisms for the anti-diabetic 
effect of Pe, Cl and Tc may be through an insulin sensitizing effect 
(stimulation of glucose uptake into adipocytes). Further studies using other 
target sites viz. skeletal muscle and hepatocytes models and in an insulin 
resistant state would help substantiate this conclusion.