Ethnomedicinal, Phytochemical and Ethnopharmacological Aspects of Four Medicinal 
Plants of Malvaceae Used in Indian Traditional Medicines: A Review.

Abat JK(1), Kumar S(2), Mohanty A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Gargi College, Sirifort Road, New Delhi110049, India. 
jasmeet29@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, 
Haryana124001, India. sanjay.micro@mdurohtak.ac.in.
(3)Department of Botany, Gargi College, Sirifort Road, New Delhi110049, India. 
aparajita.gargi@gmail.com.

The ethnomedicinal values of plants form the basis of the herbal drug industry. 
India has contributed its knowledge of traditional system medicines (Ayurveda 
and Siddha) to develop herbal medicines with negligible side effects. The World 
Health Organization has also recognized the benefits of drugs developed from 
natural products. Abutilon indicum, Hibiscus sabdariffa, Sida acuta and Sida 
rhombifolia are ethnomedicinal plants of Malvaceae, commonly used in Indian 
traditional system of medicines. Traditionally these plants were used in the 
form of extracts/powder/paste by tribal populations of India for treating common 
ailments like cough and cold, fever, stomach, kidney and liver disorders, pains, 
inflammations, wounds, etc. The present review is an overview of phytochemistry 
and ethnopharmacological studies that support many of the traditional 
ethnomedicinal uses of these plants. Many phytoconstituents have been isolated 
from the four ethnomedicinal plants and some of them have shown pharmacological 
activities that have been demonstrated by in vivo and/or in vitro experiments. 
Ethnomedicinal uses, supported by scientific evidences is essential for ensuring 
safe and effective utilization of herbal medicines.