Symplocos cochinchinensis enhances insulin sensitivity via the down regulation 
of lipogenesis and insulin resistance in high energy diet rat model.

Antu KA(1), Riya MP(1), Nair A(1), Mishra A(2), Srivastava AK(2), Raghu KG(3).

Author information:
(1)Agroprocessing and Natural Products Division, CSIR - National Institute for 
Interdisciplinary Science and Technology(NIIST), Thiruvananthapuram 695019, 
Kerala, India.
(2)Division of Biochemistry, CSIR - Central Drug Research Institute(CDRI), 
Sector 10, Janakipuram Extension, Sitapur Road, Lucknow 226031, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.
(3)Agroprocessing and Natural Products Division, CSIR - National Institute for 
Interdisciplinary Science and Technology(NIIST), Thiruvananthapuram 695019, 
Kerala, India. Electronic address: raghukgopal@niist.res.in.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: This plant has been utilized in Indian system of 
medicine for treatment of diabetes. This is clearly evident from the composition 
of Ayurvedic preparation for diabetes 'Nisakathakadi Kashayam' where this is one 
of the main ingredients of this preparation AIM OF THE STUDY: The study aims in 
elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying the insulin sensitizing effects 
of Symplocos cochinchinensis ethanol extract (SCE) using a high fructose and 
saturated fat (HFS) fed insulin resistant rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Experimental groups consisted of normal diet (ND), ND+SCE 
500mg/kg bwd, HFS+vehicle, HFS+metformin 100mg/kg bwd, HFS+SCE 250/500mg/kg bwd. 
Initially the animals were kept under HFS diet for 8 weeks, and at the end of 8 
week period, animals were found to develop insulin resistance and dyslipidemia. 
Post-administration of SCE, metformin or vehicle were carried out for 3 weeks. 
Gene and protein expressions relevant to insulin signalling pathway were 
analysed.
RESULTS: HFS significantly altered the normal physiology of animals via proteins 
and genes relevant to metabolism like stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD1), sterol 
regulatory element binding protein 1 (SREBP-1c), fatty acid synthase (FAS), 
glucose 6 phosphatase (G6Pase), phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), 
glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2), protein tyrosine phosphatse 1B (PTP1B), 
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR alpha), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) 
and glucokinase. SCE administration attenuates the insulin resistance in HFS rat 
by the down regulation of SCD1 gene expression that modulates SREBP-1c dependent 
and independent hepatic lipid accumulation.
CONCLUSION: SCE enhances insulin sensitivity via the down regulation of 
lipogenesis and insulin resistance in HFS rat model.