A rapid and efficient protocol for in vitro multiplication of genetically 
uniform Stevia rebaudiana (Bertoni).

Khan A, Jayanthi M, Gantasala NP, Bhooshan N, Rao U.

Stevia rebaudiana (Bertoni), commonly called candy leaf or sweet leaf, endemic 
to South America, is an important medicinal plant. As a source of low calorie 
natural sweetener 'stevoside', it is used in obesity, diabetes, treatment of 
heartburn and tooth decay, and also serves as a food supplement. Large scale 
commercial propagation of S. rebaudiana demands a suitable protocol. Here, we 
propose an improved protocol for in vitro multiplication of S. rebaudiana from 
nodal explants. In this protocol, the effect of laboratory grade urea on 
multiple shoot induction from nodal explants was studied. The nodal explants 
were initially cultured on Murashige and Skoog (MS) basal media for 2 weeks 
which facilitated the axillary bud break. Further, culturing of these explants 
on MS medium fortified with 6 benzyl amninopurine (BAP) (2 mg/L) and Naphthalene 
acetic acid (NAA) (1 mg/L) with and .without urea (5 mg/L) for a period of 40 
days revealed maximum shoot production of 44.56 from a single nodal explant in 
media supplemented with urea as compared to 22.44 without urea. The differences 
in the number of shoots produced were significant and these shoots readily 
rooted in MS media with NAA (4 mg/L). Primary and secondary hardening was 
successful in these plants. There were no visible morphological abnormalities 
observed in the micropropagated plantlets. Genetic analysis from random samples 
also revealed that these plants are genetically uniform. The advantage of the 
present protocol is that the complete process of multiple shoot induction, 
rooting and hardening could be completed within a period of 6 months as compared 
to the existing protocols.