Antidiabetic and antilipidemic effect of eremanthin from Costus speciosus 
(Koen.)Sm., in STZ-induced diabetic rats.

Eliza J(1), Daisy P, Ignacimuthu S, Duraipandiyan V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Holy Cross College, Trichy 620002, Tamil Nadu, 
India.

The increasing prevalence of diabetes mellitus worldwide is an issue of major 
socio-economic concern. Diabetes mellitus is a complex and a multifarious group 
of disorders that disturbs the metabolism of carbohydrates, fat and protein. 
Medicinal plants play an important role in the management of diabetes mellitus 
especially in developing countries. Costus speciosus is widely used in Indian 
medicine to treat various diseases. Eremanthin was isolated from C. speciosus. 
The structure was identified using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) 
analysis. Eremanthin was administered to streptozotocin (STZ) (50mg/kg bw) 
induced diabetic male Wistar rats at different doses (5, 10, 20mg/kg bw) for 60 
days. Plasma glucose level was significantly (p<0.05) reduced in a dose 
dependent manner when compared to the control. In addition, oral administration 
of eremanthin (20mg/kg bw) significantly decreased glycosylated hemoglobin 
(HbA(1c)), serum total cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL-cholesterol and at the 
same time markedly increased plasma insulin, tissue glycogen, HDL-cholesterol 
and serum protein. Eremanthin also restored the altered plasma enzyme (aspartate 
aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, alkaline 
phosphatase and acid phosphatase) levels to near normal. Results of this 
experimental study indicated that eremanthin possessed hypoglycemic and 
hypolipidemic activities and hence it could be used as a drug for treating 
diabetes.
