India has been recognized all over the world for spices and medicinal plants. 
Both exhibit a wide range of physiological and pharmacological properties. 
Current biomedical efforts are focused on their scientific merits, to provide 
science-based evidence for the traditional uses and to develop either functional 
foods or nutraceuticals. The Indian traditional medical systems use turmeric for 
wound healing, rheumatic disorders, gastrointestinal symptoms, deworming, 
rhinitis and as a cosmetic. Studies in India have explored its 
anti-inflammatory, cholekinetic and anti-oxidant potentials with the recent 
investigations focusing on its preventive effect on precarcinogenic, 
anti-inflammatory and anti atherosclerotic effects in biological systems both 
under in vitro and in vivo conditions in animals and humans. Both turmeric and 
curcumin were found to increase detoxifying enzymes, prevent DNA damage, improve 
DNA repair, decrease mutations and tumour formation and exhibit antioxidative 
potential in animals. Limited clinical studies suggest that turmeric can 
significantly impact excretion of mutagens in urine in smokers and regress 
precancerous palatal lesions. It reduces DNA adducts and micronuclei in oral 
epithelial cells. It prevents formation of nitroso compounds both in vivo and in 
vitro. It delays induced cataract in diabetes and reduces hyperlipidemia in 
obese rats. Recently several molecular targets have been identified for 
therapeutic / preventive effects of turmeric. Fenugreek seeds, a rich source of 
soluble fiber used in Indian cuisine reduces blood glucose and lipids and can be 
used as a food adjuvant in diabetes. Similarly garlic, onions, and ginger have 
been found to modulate favourably the process of carcinogenesis.