1. Nat Prod Bioprospect. 2019 Jun;9(3):175-200. doi: 10.1007/s13659-019-0202-5. 
Epub 2019 Apr 9.

Ethnomedicinal Investigation of Medicinal Plants of Chakrata Region 
(Uttarakhand) Used in the Traditional Medicine for Diabetes by Jaunsari Tribe.

Kumar A(1), Aswal S(1), Chauhan A(2), Semwal RB(3), Kumar A(4), Semwal DK(5).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Centre, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Uttarakhand 
Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Uttarakhand 
Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Pt. Lalit Mohan Sharma Government Postgraduate 
College, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, 249201, India.
(4)Uttarakhand Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India.
(5)Department of Phytochemistry, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Uttarakhand 
Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India. dr_dks.1983@yahoo.co.in.

The Himalayan region is the treasure house of natural wealth, particularly of 
medicinal and aromatic plants. These plants are used by the Indian traditional 
healers for the past many centuries to treat various ailments such as skin 
disorders, asthma, diabetes, snake bite, fever, pain, eye diseases, diarrhoea, 
indigestion, jaundice, burn, wound, liver disorder, CNS disorders and urinary 
tract infection. The indigenous traditional knowledge of medicinal plants and 
therapies of various local communities has been lost due to changes in 
traditional culture and the introduction of modern technologies. Therefore, it 
is essential to explore the traditional knowledge of the indigenous medicinal 
plants mainly in such areas where there is a severe threat to natural vegetation 
owing to human inhabitation. The present study aimed to explore the medicinal 
plants of Chakrata region (Jaunsar-Bawar Hills), Uttarakhand, India used in the 
folk medicine for the management of diabetes by Jaunsari Tribe. In a 
comprehensive field survey, the information about the medicinal plants have been 
mainly collected from the traditional healers and other elderly people belong to 
the tribal community. All the information about the medicinal plants of the 
study area was documented in a field book. Various tools have been used to 
collect the samples for identification purpose and the authentication of the 
plants was done with the help of taxonomists. The literature on these plants was 
also searched from online (PubMed and Scopus) as well as from some textbooks and 
Ayurvedic classical texts. The present survey-based work described a total of 54 
plants belonging to 47 genera and 30 families used in the traditional medicine 
for the management of diabetes in Chakrata region. The information gathered from 
the local community revealed that the plants are effective in diabetes and one 
can use most of them without consulting a practitioner or traditional healer. 
The literature revealed that most of the surveyed plants are already used in the 
preparation of various antidiabetic formulations such as Chandraprabha vati, 
Nishamalaki chunra, Amritamehari churna and Nisakathakadi kashayam along with 
various patent drugs which are frequently prescribed by the Ayurvedic 
practitioners in India. The present study explored the traditional as well as 
scientific knowledge on the antidiabetic plants used by the tribal community. 
The documented information on these plants can be further used by the scientific 
community to develop new drugs/formulations with the help of modern techniques.

DOI: 10.1007/s13659-019-0202-5
PMCID: PMC6538708
PMID: 30968350

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.


2. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 2005 Apr;49(2):125-31.

Therapeutic uses of Ocimum sanctum Linn (Tulsi) with a note on eugenol and its 
pharmacological actions: a short review.

Prakash P(1), Gupta N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Seema Dental College & Hospital, Barrage Road, 
Rishikesh, Dehradoon - 249 203, Uttranchal.

The medicinal plants are widely used by the traditional medical practitioners 
for curing various diseases in their day to day practice. In traditional systems 
of medicine, different parts (leaves, stem, flower, root, seeds and even whole 
plant) of Ocimum sanctum Linn (known as Tulsi in Hindi), a small herb seen 
throughout India, have been recommended for the treatment of bronchitis, 
bronchial asthma, malaria, diarrhea, dysentery, skin diseases, arthritis, 
painful eye diseases, chronic fever, insect bite etc. The Ocimum sanctum L. has 
also been suggested to possess antifertility, anticancer, antidiabetic, 
antifungal, antimicrobial, hepatoprotective, cardioprotective, antiemetic, 
antispasmodic, analgesic, adaptogenic and diaphoretic actions. Eugenol 
(1-hydroxy-2-methoxy-4-allylbenzene), the active constituent present in Ocimum 
sanctum L., has been found to be largely responsible for the therapeutic 
potentials of Tulsi. Although because of its great therapeutic potentials and 
wide occurrence in India the practitioners of traditional systems of medicine 
have been using Ocimum sanctum L. for curing various ailments, a rational 
approach to this traditional medical practice with modern system of medicine is, 
however, not much available. In order to establish the therapeutic uses of 
Ocimum sanctum L. in modern medicine, in last few decades several Indian 
scientists and researchers have studied the pharmacological effects of steam 
distilled, petroleum ether and benzene extracts of various parts of Tulsi plant 
and eugenol on immune system, reproductive system, central nervous system, 
cardiovascular system, gastric system, urinary system and blood biochemistry and 
have described the therapeutic significance of Tulsi in management of various 
ailments. These pharmacological studies have established a scientific basis for 
therapeutic uses of this plant.

PMID: 16170979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Parasitol Res. 2015 Feb;114(2):601-12. doi: 10.1007/s00436-014-4222-0. Epub 2014 
Nov 18.

Laboratory evaluation of Indian medicinal plants as repellents against malaria, 
dengue, and filariasis vector mosquitoes.

Govindarajan M(1), Sivakumar R.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Vector Control, Phytochemistry and Nanotechnology, Department of 
Zoology, Annamalai University, Annamalainagar, Tamilnadu, 608 002, India, 
drgovindzoo@yahoo.com.

Mosquito-borne diseases have an economic impact, including loss in commercial 
and labor outputs, particularly in countries with tropical and subtropical 
climates; however, no part of the world is free from vector-borne diseases. 
Mosquitoes are the carriers of severe and well-known illnesses such as malaria, 
arboviral encephalitis, dengue fever, chikungunya fever, West Nile virus, and 
yellow fever. These diseases produce significant morbidity and mortality in 
humans and livestock around the world. In view of the recently increased 
interest in developing plant origin insecticides as an alternative to chemical 
insecticides, in the present study, the repellent activity of crude hexane, 
ethyl acetate, benzene, chloroform, and methanol extracts of leaf of Erythrina 
indica and root of Asparagus racemosus were assayed for their repellency against 
three important vector mosquitoes, viz., Anopheles stephensi, Aedes aegypti, and 
Culex quinquefasciatus. The crude extract was applied on a membrane used for 
membrane feeding of unfed mosquitoes in a 1-ft cage. About 50 unfed 3-4-day-old 
laboratory-reared pathogen-free strains of A. stephensi, A. aegypti, and C. 
quinquefasciatus were introduced in a 1-ft cage fitted with a membrane with 
blood for feeding with temperature maintained at 37 °C through circulating water 
bath maintained at 40-45 °C. Three concentrations (1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 mg/cm(2)) 
of the crude extracts were evaluated. Repellents in E. indica afforded longer 
protection time against A. stephensi, A. aegypti, and C. quinquefasciatus than 
those in A. racemosus at 5.0 mg/cm(2) concentration, and the mean complete 
protection time ranged from 120 to 210 min with the different extracts tested. 
In this observation, these two plant crude extracts gave protection against 
mosquito bites; also, the repellent activity is dependent on the strength of the 
plant extracts. These results suggest that the leaf extract of E. indica and 
root extract of A. racemosus have the potential to be used as an ideal 
eco-friendly approach for the control of mosquitoes. This is the first report on 
the mosquito repellent activity of the reported A. racemosus and E. indica 
plants.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-014-4222-0
PMID: 25399815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2011 May;20(3):225-39. doi: 10.1097/CEJ.0b013e32834473f4.

Amla (Emblica officinalis Gaertn), a wonder berry in the treatment and 
prevention of cancer.

Baliga MS(1), Dsouza JJ.

Author information:
(1)Father Muller Medical College, Kankanady, Mangalore, Karnataka, India. 
msbaliga@gmail.com

Comment in
    Eur J Cancer Prev. 2013 Mar;22(2):198.

Emblica officinalis Gaertn. or Phyllanthus emblica Linn, commonly known as 
Indian gooseberry or amla, is arguably the most important medicinal plant in the 
Indian traditional system of medicine, the Ayurveda. Various parts of the plant 
are used to treat a range of diseases, but the most important is the fruit. The 
fruit is used either alone or in combination with other plants to treat many 
ailments such as common cold and fever; as a diuretic, laxative, liver tonic, 
refrigerant, stomachic, restorative, alterative, antipyretic, anti-inflammatory, 
hair tonic; to prevent peptic ulcer and dyspepsia, and as a digestive. 
Preclinical studies have shown that amla possesses antipyretic, analgesic, 
antitussive, antiatherogenic, adaptogenic, cardioprotective, gastroprotective, 
antianemia, antihypercholesterolemia, wound healing, antidiarrheal, 
antiatherosclerotic, hepatoprotective, nephroprotective, and neuroprotective 
properties. In addition, experimental studies have shown that amla and some of 
its phytochemicals such as gallic acid, ellagic acid, pyrogallol, some 
norsesquiterpenoids, corilagin, geraniin, elaeocarpusin, and prodelphinidins B1 
and B2 also possess antineoplastic effects. Amla is also reported to possess 
radiomodulatory, chemomodulatory, chemopreventive effects, free radical 
scavenging, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antimutagenic and immunomodulatory 
activities, properties that are efficacious in the treatment and prevention of 
cancer. This review for the first time summarizes the results related to these 
properties and also emphasizes the aspects that warrant future research to 
establish its activity and utility as a cancer preventive and therapeutic drug 
in humans.

DOI: 10.1097/CEJ.0b013e32834473f4
PMID: 21317655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Medicines (Basel). 2017 Oct 18;4(4):75. doi: 10.3390/medicines4040075.

Ethnomedicinal, Phytochemical and Ethnopharmacological Aspects of Four Medicinal 
Plants of Malvaceae Used in Indian Traditional Medicines: A Review.

Abat JK(1), Kumar S(2), Mohanty A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, Gargi College, Sirifort Road, New Delhi110049, India. 
jasmeet29@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, 
Haryana124001, India. sanjay.micro@mdurohtak.ac.in.
(3)Department of Botany, Gargi College, Sirifort Road, New Delhi110049, India. 
aparajita.gargi@gmail.com.

The ethnomedicinal values of plants form the basis of the herbal drug industry. 
India has contributed its knowledge of traditional system medicines (Ayurveda 
and Siddha) to develop herbal medicines with negligible side effects. The World 
Health Organization has also recognized the benefits of drugs developed from 
natural products. Abutilon indicum, Hibiscus sabdariffa, Sida acuta and Sida 
rhombifolia are ethnomedicinal plants of Malvaceae, commonly used in Indian 
traditional system of medicines. Traditionally these plants were used in the 
form of extracts/powder/paste by tribal populations of India for treating common 
ailments like cough and cold, fever, stomach, kidney and liver disorders, pains, 
inflammations, wounds, etc. The present review is an overview of phytochemistry 
and ethnopharmacological studies that support many of the traditional 
ethnomedicinal uses of these plants. Many phytoconstituents have been isolated 
from the four ethnomedicinal plants and some of them have shown pharmacological 
activities that have been demonstrated by in vivo and/or in vitro experiments. 
Ethnomedicinal uses, supported by scientific evidences is essential for ensuring 
safe and effective utilization of herbal medicines.

DOI: 10.3390/medicines4040075
PMCID: PMC5750599
PMID: 29057840

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


6. J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol. 2018 Mar 28;29(2):107-122. doi: 
10.1515/jbcpp-2016-0132.

Acorus calamus: a bio-reserve of medicinal values.

Khwairakpam AD(1), Damayenti YD(1), Deka A(1), Monisha J(1), Roy NK(1), 
Padmavathi G(1), Kunnumakkara AB(2).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology Laboratory and DBT-AIST International Laboratory for Advanced 
Biomedicine (DAILAB), Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam-781039, India.
(2)Cancer Biology Laboratory and DBT-AIST International Laboratory for Advanced 
Biomedicine (DAILAB), Department of Biosciences and Bioengineering, Indian 
Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam-781039, India, Phone: +91 361 
258 2231 (office), +91 789 600 5326 (mobile), Fax: +91 361 258 2249 (office), 
E-mail: kunnumakkara@iitg.ernet.in.

Many plants are found to possess reliable pharmacological properties and have 
started to attract the attention of researchers. One such holistic plant is 
Acorus calamus, commonly known as sweet flag, belonging to the rhizomatous 
family Acoraceae. The different parts of this plant, such as the leaves and 
rhizomes, are used traditionally in different medicinal preparations for the 
treatment of various ailments including arthritis, neuralgia, diarrhoea, 
dyspepsia, kidney and liver troubles, eczema, sinusitis, asthma, fevers, 
bronchitis, hair loss, and other disorders. Many reports have also appeared in 
mainstream scientific journals confirming its nutritional and medicinal 
properties. Biochemical analysis of the plant has revealed a large number of 
secondary metabolites that may be responsible for its rich medicinal properties. 
Basic scientific research has uncovered the mechanisms by which itexerts its 
therapeutic effects. Medicinal herbs such as A. calamus are quite promising in 
the recent therapeutic scenario, with a large number of people favouring 
remedies and health approaches that are free from the side effects often 
associated with synthetic chemicals. In this review, we try to summarise the 
ethno-medicinal uses, botanical descriptions, phytochemical constituents, and 
biological activity of the plant parts, as well as the molecular targets of A. 
calamus, which we hope will serve as a good base for further work on this plant.

DOI: 10.1515/jbcpp-2016-0132
PMID: 29389665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Ethnopharmacol. 2001 Feb;74(2):195-204. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(00)00369-x.

In vitro screening of Indian medicinal plants for antiplasmodial activity.

Simonsen HT(1), Nordskjold JB, Smitt UW, Nyman U, Palpu P, Joshi P, Varughese G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Royal Danish School of Pharmacy, Group of 
Pharmacognosy, Universitetsparken 2, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Plants traditionally used in India to treat fever or malaria were examined in 
vitro for antiplasmodial properties against Plasmodium falciparum. Of 80 
analysed ethanol extracts, from 47 species, significant effects were found for 
31 of the extracts. These represent 23 different species from 20 families. Of 
the active species 20 were tested against P. falciparum for the first time. The 
following five species seems to be of special interest for further antimalarial 
studies, Casearia elliptica, Holarrhena pubescens, Pongamia pinnata, Soymida 
febrifuga, and Plumbago zeylanica.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(00)00369-x
PMID: 11167038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biomed Pharmacother. 2017 Nov;95:1301-1313. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.09.041. 
Epub 2017 Oct 6.

Beneficial health applications and medicinal values of Pedicularis plants: A 
review.

Yatoo MI(1), Dimri U(2), Gopalakrishnan A(2), Karthik K(3), Gopi M(4), Khandia 
R(5), Saminathan M(6), Saxena A(7), Alagawany M(8), Farag MR(9), Munjal A(5), 
Dhama K(10).

Author information:
(1)Sher-E-Kashmir University of Agricultural Sciences and Technology of Kashmir, 
Shalimar, 190025 Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir, India.
(2)Division of Veterinary Medicine, Indian Veterinary Research Institute 
Izatnagar, Bareilly, U.P. - 243122, India.
(3)Central University Laboratory, Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences 
University, Madhavaram Milk Colony, Chennai, Tamil Nadu - 600051, India.
(4)Division of Avian Physiology and Reproduction, ICAR-Central Avian Research 
Institute, Izatnagar, Bareilly, U.P. - 243122, India.
(5)Department of Biochemistry & Genetics, Barkatullah University, Bhopal-462026, 
M.P., India.
(6)Division of Pathology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute Izatnagar, 
Bareilly, U.P. - 243122, India.
(7)Division of Molecular Bioprospection, CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants, Lucknow-226015, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(8)Department of Poultry, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 
44511, Egypt.
(9)Forensic Medicine and Toxicology Department, Veterinary Medicine Faculty, 
Zagazig University, Zagazig - 44511, Egypt.
(10)Division of Pathology, Indian Veterinary Research Institute Izatnagar, 
Bareilly, U.P. - 243122, India. Electronic address: kdhama@rediffmail.com.

Pedicularis plants (Orobanchaceae), popularly known as lousewort, are found in 
Asia, Europe, and North America, and have been used in Sowa-Rigpa, the Himalayan 
art of healing and a traditional system of medicine for treating various 
ailments in humans. A comprehensive compilation on this valuable medicinal plant 
is not available, however. The present extensive review provides insight into 
the salient medicinal properties of Pedicularis plants with respect to various 
health issues and diseases. Our previous studies on Pedicularis plants from the 
Changthang region of Ladakh (India) and research advances leading to new 
developments in this field have prompted this review. The information presented 
here has been compiled and analyzed from authenticated published resources 
available on Medline, Pubmed, Pubmed Central, Science Direct, and other 
scientific databases. The Pedicularis genus consists of approximately 600 
species (83 of which are found in India), with commonly reported species being 
Pedicularis longiflora Rudolph, P. bicornuta Klotzsch, P. oederi Vahl, P. 
cheilanthifolia, and P. pectinata. The major phytoconstituents of the 
Pedicularis sp. are phenols, phenylethanoids, phenylpropanoids, flavonoids, 
iridoids, lignans, and alkaloids, among others. The existing literature 
highlights that these compounds possess antioxidant, immunomodulatory, 
anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, antibacterial, antifungal, analgesic, 
antitumor, hepatoprotective, neuroprotective, muscle-relaxing, antifatigue, 
diuretic, antipyretic, antithrombus, antihemolysis, and DNA-repairing 
properties. This medicinal herb is used in the treatment of leucorrhoea, fevers, 
sterility, rheumatism, general debility, collapse, and urinary problems, and for 
revitalizing the blood circulation, improving digestion, and maintaining 
vitality. This review emphasizes the various medicinal aspects of Pedicularis 
sp. plants containing a variety of phytoconstituents. Besides phenols, 
terpenoids, flavonoids, lignans, tannins, iridoid, and phenylpropanoid 
glycosides are among the active constituents responsible for multiple health 
effects. However, further extensive research is required to characterize the 
various phytoconstituents of Pedicularis to explore their modes of action at a 
molecular level and identify other beneficial applications that can exploit the 
tremendous medicinal potential of this important herb.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.09.041
PMID: 28938521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2001 Nov;96(8):1033-42. doi: 
10.1590/s0074-02762001000800002.

The search for new antimalarial drugs from plants used to treat fever and 
malaria or plants ramdomly selected: a review.

Krettli AU(1), Andrade-Neto VF, Brandão MG, Ferrari WM.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, MG, 30190-002, 
Brasil. akrettli@cpqrr.fiocruz.br

In this review we discuss the ongoing situation of human malaria in the 
Brazilian Amazon, where it is endemic causing over 610,000 new acute cases 
yearly, a number which is on the increase. This is partly a result of drug 
resistant parasites and new antimalarial drugs are urgently needed. The 
approaches we have used in the search of new drugs during decades are now 
reviewed and include ethnopharmocology, plants randomly selected, extracts or 
isolated substances from plants shown to be active against the blood stage 
parasites in our previous studies. Emphasis is given on the medicinal plant 
Bidens pilosa, proven to be active against the parasite blood stages in tests 
using freshly prepared plant extracts. The anti-sporozoite activity of one plant 
used in the Brazilian endemic area to prevent malaria is also described, the so 
called "Indian beer" (Ampelozizyphus amazonicus, Rhamnaceae). Freshly prepared 
extracts from the roots of this plant were totally inactive against blood stage 
parasites, but active against sporozoites of Plasmodium gallinaceum or the 
primary exoerythrocytic stages reducing tissue parasitism in inoculated 
chickens. This result will be of practical importance if confirmed in mammalian 
malaria. Problems and perspectives in the search for antimalarial drugs are 
discussed as well as the toxicological and clinical trials to validate some of 
the active plants for public health use in Brazil.

DOI: 10.1590/s0074-02762001000800002
PMID: 11784919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:9232593. doi: 
10.1155/2016/9232593. Epub 2016 Aug 28.

Genus Tinospora: Ethnopharmacology, Phytochemistry, and Pharmacology.

Chi S(1), She G(1), Han D(1), Wang W(2), Liu Z(2), Liu B(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chinese Pharmacy, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 
100102, China.
(2)National Institute of Metrology, Beijing 100013, China.

The genus Tinospora includes 34 species, in which several herbs were used as 
traditional medicines by indigenous groups throughout the tropical and 
subtropical parts of Asia, Africa, and Australia. The extensive literature 
survey revealed Tinospora species to be a group of important medicinal plants 
used for the ethnomedical treatment of colds, headaches, pharyngitis, fever, 
diarrhea, oral ulcer, diabetes, digestive disorder, and rheumatoid arthritis. 
Indian ethnopharmacological data points to the therapeutic potential of the T. 
cordifolia for the treatment of diabetic conditions. While Tinospora species are 
confusing in individual ingredients and their mechanisms of action, the 
ethnopharmacological history of those plants indicated that they exhibit 
antidiabetic, antioxidation, antitumor, anti-inflammation, antimicrobial, 
antiosteoporosis, and immunostimulation activities. While the clinical 
applications in modern medicine are lacking convincing evidence and support, 
this review is aimed at summarizing the current knowledge of the traditional 
uses, phytochemistry, biological activities, and toxicities of the genus 
Tinospora to reveal its therapeutic potentials and gaps, offering opportunities 
for future researches.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9232593
PMCID: PMC5018348
PMID: 27648105


11. J Ethnopharmacol. 2015 Aug 22;172:133-44. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.06.002. Epub 
2015 Jun 16.

Ethnomedicinal plants traditionally used in health care practices by inhabitants 
of Western Himalaya.

Malik ZA(1), Bhat JA(2), Ballabha R(1), Bussmann RW(3), Bhatt AB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, HNB Garhwal Central University, 
Srinagar, Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Department of Forestry, College of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Fiji 
National University, Koronivia, PO Box 1544, (Nausori) Republic of Fiji Islands. 
Electronic address: jahan191@gmail.com.
(3)William L. Brown Center, Missouri Botanical Garden, PO Box 299, St. Louis, MO 
63166-0299, USA.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Inspite of tremendous advances made in 
allopathic medicine, herbal practice still plays an important role in management 
and curing various ailments in remote and rural areas of India. However, 
traditional knowledge on the use of medicinal plants is eroding day by day and 
there is a need to document such knowledge, before it is lost forever. The aim 
of the present study was to document the indigenous and traditional knowledge of 
medicinal plants used by local inhabitants in and around Kedarnath Wildlife 
Sanctuary of Indian Himalaya for the advancement of biomedical research and 
development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The intensive field survey was carried out at three 
different altitudes of Kedarnath Wildlife Sanctuary (KWLS) and its adjoining 
areas. The inhabitants were interviewed about the local name of plants having 
ethno-medicinal values, plant parts used, mode of processing/application and 
preparation and dosage through discussions and semi structured questionnaires.
RESULTS: A total of 97 medicinal plant species belonging to 52 families and 83 
genera were reported for curing various ailments like fever, cough, cold, 
digestive disorders, constipation, menstrual disorders etc. Out of 97 plant 
species reported, 21 are rare or threatened. Literature review revealed that 11 
out of the 97 plant species are reported with new therapeutic uses. The most 
frequently utilized plant part was the root/rhizome (33%) followed by leaf 
(27%). In some cases whole plant was utilized. A few medicinal plants had some 
veterinary uses also.
CONCLUSION: The study provides comprehensive information about the eroding 
indigenous and traditional knowledge of medicinal plants used by local 
inhabitants in a part of Western Himalaya, India. The identification of the 
active ingredients of the plants used by the local people may provide some 
useful leads for the development of new drugs and such new approaches of 
traditional knowledge regarding medicinal plants and laboratory analysis might 
help pharmaceutical industry in new chapters for the wellbeing of mankind.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.06.002
PMID: 26087233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 Sep 11;155(2):925-86. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.06.029. 
Epub 2014 Jun 19.

A cross-cultural analysis of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh (India) medicinal plant 
use.

Gairola S(1), Sharma J(2), Bedi YS(3).

Author information:
(1)Plant Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, 
Canal Road, Jammu 180001, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 
Anusandhan Bhawan, 2 Rafi Marg, New Delhi 110001, India. Electronic address: 
sumeetgairola@iiim.ac.in.
(2)Department of Botany, University of Jammu, Jammu 180006, Jammu & Kashmir, 
India.
(3)Plant Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, 
Canal Road, Jammu 180001, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, 
Anusandhan Bhawan, 2 Rafi Marg, New Delhi 110001, India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Jammu & Kashmir (J&K) is a predominantly 
Himalayan state in the north-western part of India. It has three geographically 
distinct divisions viz., Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, which are immensely rich in 
their biological and cultural diversity. Medicinal plants are an important 
element of indigenous medical system of the region. The main goal of the present 
article is to examine the use of ethnomedicinal plants in three divisions of J&K 
and to discuss cross-cultural consensus on the use of medicinal plants in these 
divisions. The article also discusses the gaps in the current state of knowledge 
on ethnomedicinal plants of the region and gives recommendations for the future 
studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Scientific literature on ethnomedicinal field studies 
conducted in J&K state of India available in the journals, edited books and 
other scientific databases viz., CAB international, DOAJ, Google Scholar, 
PubMed, Science direct, SciFinder, Scopus and Web of Science were searched. Only 
field based ethnomedicinal surveys from last four decades up to December 2013 
reporting first hand information on the medicinal plants used to treat human 
health related ailments by indigenous communities of J&K were included in this 
study. Venn diagram was used to analyze the cross-cultural consensus on the use 
of ethnomedicinal plants in the three divisions of J&K.
RESULTS: A total of 948 plant taxa (923 angiosperms, 12 gymnosperms and 13 
pteridophytes) belonging to 129 families, 509 genera, 937 species and 11 
varieties have so far been reported to have a traditional medicinal use by 
indigenous communities of J&K. Asteraceae (60 genera, 132 spp.) was the most 
frequently used family followed by Fabaceae (32 genera, 50 spp.) and Lamiaceae 
(27 genera, 55 spp.). 514, 415 and 397 medicinal plants were used in Jammu, 
Kashmir and Ladakh divisions, respectively. Sixty eight plant taxa were used in 
all the three divisions, whereas 95 plants were common between Ladakh and Jammu, 
127 plants between Ladakh and Kashmir, and 216 plants between Jammu and Kashmir. 
Maximum numbers of plant taxa were used for treating dermatological problems 
(321), followed by cold, cough and throat related ailments (250), fever (224), 
joint and muscle related ailments (215), gastrointestinal disorders (210), 
urogenital ailments (199), respiratory ailments (151), body pain (135) and 
gynecological disorders (127).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study from the J&K state, which has examined the 
medicinal plant use in three divisions of J&K and discussed the promising 
medicinal plant species with cross-cultural consensus. The analysis of the data 
suggested that while large numbers of plants are used medicinally in each 
division, there is a low interregional consensus and high variation between 
medicinal plants used in these divisions, which is due to both cultural 
divergence as well as biological distinctness. The issues related to current 
status of knowledge on medicinal plants used by indigenous communities of J&K 
have been discussed and some recommendations have been made for future studies 
on medicinal plants in J&K region.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.06.029
PMID: 24952280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2005 Sep;57(9):1127-52. doi: 10.1211/jpp.57.9.0008.

Historical and modern medicinal plant uses--the example of the Ch'orti' Maya and 
Ladinos in Eastern Guatemala.

Kufer J(1), Förther H, Pöll E, Heinrich M.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy, The School of Pharmacy, University 
of London, 29-39 Brunswick Square, London, WC1N 1AX, UK.

Local empirical knowledge about medicinal properties of plants is the basis for 
their use as home remedies. Particularly in developing countries such remedies 
still are an indispensable resource for everyday health care. They form the 
basis for numerous studies on drugs from natural sources. Like other indigenous 
groups across the world, the Ch'orti' Maya in Eastern Guatemala are currently 
experiencing a phase of dramatic cultural change, with their traditional 
knowledge about plants being in great danger of disappearing. During 17 months 
of fieldwork, medicinal plant uses were documented using a semi-quantitative 
approach and analysed using ethnopharmacological methods. The most important 
groups of illnesses treated with plants were gastrointestinal complaints and 
illnesses associated with pain and fever. Field data were compared with mostly 
unpublished historical data collected in the 1930s by the anthropologist Charles 
Wisdom. This comparison showed that medicinal plant uses that are more 
consistent over time are also shared by a larger number of people. A literature 
search on the most frequently mentioned medicinal plants showed that, even for 
widely used medicinal species, phytochemical and pharmacological data are 
insufficient for fully understanding their therapeutic profile. Whereas a few 
examples of potentially dangerous practices were encountered, the limited amount 
of information available mostly supports local medicinal plant usage.

DOI: 10.1211/jpp.57.9.0008
PMID: 16105234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2019 May;32(3):1111-1119.

Report: Pharmacognostic and physicochemical screening of Euphorbia nivulia 
Buch.-Ham.

Younus M(1), Hasan MM(1), Rehman MS(2), Abbas K(3), Sarwar G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, The Islamia University of Bahawalpur, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Baha ud Din Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Botany, Faculty of Sciences, The Islamia University of 
Bahawalpur, Pakistan.

Euphorbia nivulia Buch.-Ham. (Euphorbiaceae) is commonly known as Indian Spurge 
Tree in English, and "Saj Thor" or "Jhanami booti" in local language. The plant 
is used traditionally in the treatment of various diseases like inflammation, 
fever, worm infection, asthma, cough, wounds and diabetes. In current study 
fresh as well as dried aerial parts of the plant and cut sections were examined, 
both macroscopically and microscopically. The study also deals with fluorescence 
analysis and phytochemical characteristics and other WHO recommended methods for 
standardization. WHO guidelines on quality control for medicinal plants 
materials were used for pharmacognostical evaluation of E. nivulia, 
phytochemical screening helps in determining the predominant classes of active 
constituents responsible for the activity. The present work will be helpful in 
identification of the fresh and dried samples of aerial parts 
pharmacognostically and anatomically. These studies will serve as a reference 
for correct identification and may be helpful in checking any type of 
adulteration. These observations will also help in differentiating this species 
from closely related species of the same genus and family.

PMID: 31278728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Pharmacogn Rev. 2017 Jul-Dec;11(22):167-174. doi: 10.4103/phrev.phrev_17_17.

Psidium guajava: A Single Plant for Multiple Health Problems of Rural Indian 
Population.

Daswani PG(1), Gholkar MS(1), Birdi TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Plants, The Foundation for Medical Research, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.

The rural population in India faces a number of health problems and often has to 
rely on local remedies. Psidium guajava Linn. (guava), a tropical plant which is 
used as food and medicine can be used by rural communities due to its several 
medicinal properties. A literature search was undertaken to gauge the rural 
health scenario in India and compile the available literature on guava so as to 
reflect its usage in the treatment of multiple health conditions prevalent in 
rural communities. Towards this, electronic databases such as Pubmed, Science 
Direct, google scholar were scanned. Information on clinical trials on guava was 
obtained from Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and 
Clinicaltrial.gov. The literature survey revealed that guava possesses various 
medicinal properties which have been reported from across the globe in the form 
of ethnobotanical/ethnopharmacological surveys, laboratory investigations and 
clinical trials. Besides documenting the safety of guava, the available 
literature shows that guava is efficacious against the following conditions 
which rural communities would encounter. (a) Gastrointestinal infections; (b) 
Malaria; (c)Respiratory infections; (d) Oral/dental infections; (e) Skin 
infections; (f) Diabetes; (g) Cardiovascular/hypertension; (h) Cancer; (i) 
Malnutrition; (j) Women problems; (k) Pain; (l) Fever; (m) Liver problems; (n) 
Kidney problems. In addition, guava can also be useful for treatment of animals 
and explored for its commercial applications. In conclusion, popularization of 
guava, can have multiple applications for rural communities.

DOI: 10.4103/phrev.phrev_17_17
PMCID: PMC5628524
PMID: 28989253

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


16. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Apr 2;181:118-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.036. Epub 
2016 Jan 25.

Traditional uses, phytochemistry and pharmacological properties of Neolamarckia 
cadamba: A review.

Pandey A(1), Negi PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Fruit and Vegetable Technology, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 570020, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
(AcSIR), New Delhi 110001, India.
(2)Fruit and Vegetable Technology, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 570020, India. Electronic address: psnegi@cftri.res.in.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: There are more than 3000 officially documented 
plants in the Indian subcontinent that hold great medicinal potential. One such 
under-explored plant is an evergreen tropical tree Neolamarckia cadamba (Roxb.) 
Bosser (Rubiaceae). It is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical regions 
of the world and has therapeutic potential against many diseases such as 
diabetes, anaemia, stomatitis, leprosy, cancer and infectious diseases. 
Neolamarckia cadamba has historical existence in India and it is mentioned in 
mythical stories. There are several reports on medicinal values of root, bark 
and leaves of N. cadamba; but the literature on its fruits is scanty. Therefore, 
the present review aims to provide updated comprehensive information on the 
phytochemistry and pharmacological properties of different parts of N. cadamba 
tree with special reference to its fruit, in order to open new perspectives for 
future food and pharmacological research.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature search was performed on N. cadamba using 
ethnobotanical textbooks, published articles in peer-reviewed journals, 
unpublished materials, government survey reports and scientific databases such 
as Pubmed, Scopus, Web of Science, Science Direct, Google Scholar and other web 
search engines (Google, Yahoo). The Plant List, International Plant Name Index 
and Kew Botanical Garden Plant name databases were used to validate the 
scientific names.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Neolamarckia cadamba is one of the economically 
important trees, which is being exploited for paper, pulp and wood industry. In 
folk medicine, various parts of N. cadamba are used in the treatment of various 
ailments such as fever, uterine complaints, blood diseases, skin diseases, 
tumour, anaemia, eye inflammation and diarrhoea. Other reported uses of N. 
cadamba include antihepatotoxic, antimalarial, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, 
antipyretic, diuretic and laxative. Various phytochemicals such as cadambine and 
its derivatives (dihydrocadambine and isodihydrocadambine) and indole alkaloids 
(Neolamarckines) were isolated from the leaves; whereas the presence of quinovic 
acid derivatives have been reported in the bark of N. cadamba.
CONCLUSION: The present review compiles information on an ethnopharmacologically 
useful plant N. cadamba. Bioactive compounds responsible for its various 
medicinal properties and their effects at the molecular level need to be 
investigated in more detail. Furthermore, the detailed study of toxicity and 
pharmacological properties of extracts as well as molecules in N. cadamba is 
required to confirm the ethnomedicinal claims of N. cadamba for food and 
pharmaceutical applications.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.036
PMID: 26821190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Fitoterapia. 2012 Jul;83(5):817-30. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2012.04.012.

Phyto-chemical and pharmacological applications of Berberis aristata.

Potdar D(1), Hirwani RR, Dhulap S.

Author information:
(1)CSIR Unit for Research and Development of Information Products Jopasana, 
Kothrud, Pune, India. diptipotdar99@gmail.com

In the recent years, the interest and research in medicinal plants have 
increased in a great deal. Ayurvedic medicines and formulations developed from 
ancient Indian herbal systems are renowned for their various important 
applications. Berberis aristata - an Indian medicinal plant, which belongs to 
the family Berberidaceae is an ayurvedic herb used since ancient times. It is 
also known as Indian berberi, Daruharidra, Daruhaldi, Darvi and Chitra. The 
plant is useful as anti-pyretic, anti-bacterial, anti-microbial, 
anti-hepatotoxic, anti-hyperglycaemic, anti-cancer, anti-oxidant and 
anti-lipidemic agent. B. aristata extracts and its formulations are also useful 
in the treatment of diarrhoea, haemorrhoids, gynaecological disorders, HIV-AIDS, 
osteoporosis, diabetes, eye and ear infections, wound healing, jaundice, skin 
diseases and malarial fever. This review aims to highlight the ethnobotany, 
pharmacognosy and pharmacological uses of B. aristata which will give insights 
in developing potentially new bioactives from the plant scaffolds. This review 
will also highlight the patenting trends, the new compositions developed using 
the actives from B. aristata and the different assignees involved in filing 
patents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fitote.2012.04.012
PMID: 22808523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nat Prod Res. 2014;28(18):1454-66. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2014.915827. Epub 2014 
May 13.

Acorus calamus (The Healing Plant): a review on its medicinal potential, 
micropropagation and conservation.

Sharma V(1), Singh I, Chaudhary P.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biotechnology , Arni University , Kathgarh, Indora, Kangra , 
HP 176401 , India.

Acorus calamus L., a tall, perennial, grass-like monocot plant from the 
Acoraceae family, is a well-known plant in Indian traditional medicines for 
centuries. It is a highly valued herb as it acts as a rejuvenator for brain and 
nervous system. It is a main medhya drug, which has the property of improving 
the memory power and intellect. Rhizomes of the plant are widely used in the 
treatment of number of ailments such as epilepsy, mental ailments, chronic 
diarrhoea, dysentery, fever, abdominal tumours, kidney and liver troubles, and 
rheumatism. A. calamus leaves, rhizomes and its essential oil possess many 
biological activities such as antispasmodic, carminative and are compiled in a 
simple approach in this review. This review presents a pragmatic description 
that deals with chemical constituents, toxicology, ethnobotany and 
pharmacological properties of A. calamus for easy and better understanding of 
the outstanding medicinal potential of this very special plant and sirens for 
its conservation.

DOI: 10.1080/14786419.2014.915827
PMID: 24824923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Pharmacopuncture. 2017 Jun;20(2):93-99. doi: 10.3831/KPI.2017.20.012. Epub 
2017 Jun 30.

The Indian Magical Herb 'Sanjeevni' (Selaginella bryopteris L.) - A Promising 
Anti-inflammatory Phytomedicine for the Treatment of Patients with Inflammatory 
Skin Diseases.

Paswan SK(1), Gautam A(2), Verma P(1), Rao CV(1), Sidhu OP(1), Singh AP(1), 
Srivastava S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy & Ethnopharmacology, National Botanical Research 
Institute (CSIR), U.P., Lucknow, India.
(2)Amity Institute of Pharmacy, Amity University, Lucknow, India.

OBJECTIVES: Selaginella bryopteris L. (family: Selaginaceae), is often used in 
traditional Indian systems of medicine for the prevention and cure of several 
disorders and for the treatment of patient with spermatorrhoea, venereal 
disease, constipation, colitis, urinary tract infections, fever, epilepsy, 
leucorrhoea, beri-beri and cancer. It is also used as a strength tonic. This 
study aimed to evaluate the mechanisms underlying the anti-inflammatory effects 
of topically administered aqueous, polar and non-polar methanolic fractions (10 
mg/20 μL) of Selaginella bryopteris.
METHODS: An acute oral toxicity study of Selaginella bryopteris at doses from 
250 to 2,000 mg/kg body weight (bw) was performed. Aqueous, polar and non-polar 
methanolic extracts (10 mg/20 μL) applied topically for 5 days were evaluated 
for their anti-inflammatory effects against 12-tetra-O-decanoyl phorbol acetate 
(TPA)-induced inflammation by using the redness in the ear, the ear's weight 
(edema), oxidative stress parameters, such as lipid-peroxide (LPO) and nitric 
oxide (NO), and the pro-inflammatory cytokines involved in inflammation, such as 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-6. Indomethacine (0.5 
mg/20 μL) was used for the positive control.
RESULTS: Selaginella bryopteris produced no mortalities when administered orally 
at doses from 250 to 2,000 mg/kg bw. Topical treatment with the non-polar 
methanolic fraction (10 mg/20 αL) significantly suppressed redness (2.4 ± 0.5) 
and edema (30.4 ± 1) and effectively reduced the LPO level (32.3 ± 3.3). The NO 
level was (8.07 ± 0.55), and the TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 levels were decreased to 
69.6 ± 15.5, 7.7 ± 4.8 and 82.6 ± 5.9, respectively.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated for the first time the mechanisms underlying 
the anti-inflammatory effect of medicinal plants like Selaginella bryopteris and 
quantified the pharmacological interactions between them. The present study 
showed this herbal product to be a promising anti-inflammatory phytomedicine for 
the treatment of patients with inflammatory skin diseases.

DOI: 10.3831/KPI.2017.20.012
PMCID: PMC5532467
PMID: 30087785

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
there are no conflicts of interest.


20. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Aug 2;189:186-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.05.014. Epub 
2016 May 10.

Ethnobotanical uses of neem (Azadirachta indica A.Juss.; Meliaceae) leaves in 
Bali (Indonesia) and the Indian subcontinent in relation with historical 
background and phytochemical properties.

Sujarwo W(1), Keim AP(2), Caneva G(3), Toniolo C(4), Nicoletti M(5).

Author information:
(1)Bali Botanical Gardens, Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI), Candikuning 
Baturiti, Tabanan 82191, Bali, Indonesia; Department of Science, University Roma 
Tre, Viale G. Marconi 446, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
wawan.sujarwo@lipi.go.id.
(2)Botany Division (Herbarium Bogoriense), Research Center for Biology, 
Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI), Cibinong Science Center, 16911 West 
Java, Indonesia. Electronic address: ary.prihardhyanto@lipi.go.id.
(3)Department of Science, University Roma Tre, Viale G. Marconi 446, 00146 Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: giulia.caneva@uniroma3.it.
(4)Department of Environmental Biology, La Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale 
Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: chiara.toniolo@uniroma1.it.
(5)Department of Environmental Biology, La Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale 
Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
marcello.nicoletti@uniroma1.it.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Neem (Azadirachta indica; Meliaceae) is widely 
known for its cold pressed seed oil, mainly used as insecticide, but also for 
cosmetic, medicinal and agricultural uses. The seed oil is widely employed in 
the Indian subcontinent, and the leaves seem to have a lower relevance, but the 
ethnobotanical information of Bali (Indonesia) considers the utilisation of 
leaves for medicinal properties.
AIM OF THE STUDY: We report ethnopharmacological information about current uses 
of neem, in particular of the leaves, besides the insecticidal one, we discuss 
on the historical background of their uses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ethnobotanical data were collected using both literature 
and scientific references and semi-structured interviews with 50 informants 
(ages ranged between 14 and 76 years old) through the snowball method in 
thirteen aga (indigenous Balinese) villages, following Ethic code procedures. 
The informants were asked to specify: which part of the plant was used, and how 
that plant part was used. Plant specimens were collected, identified and made 
into herbarium voucher. In consideration of the high variability and complex 
chemical constituent of neem, a HPTLC analysis of neem leaves coming from both 
the Indonesian island of Bali and the Indian subcontinent was carried out.
RESULTS: The data on the medical use of traditional preparations from leaves of 
neem display a wide spectrum of applications. In the Indian subcontinent, neem 
leaves are used to treat dental and gastrointestinal disorders, malaria fevers, 
skin diseases, and as insects repellent, while the Balinese used neem leaves as 
a diuretic and for diabetes, headache, heartburn, and stimulating the appetite. 
Differences in utilisation cannot be related to chemical differences and other 
constituents besides limonoids must be investigated and related to the 
multipurpose activity of neem.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that neem leaves are believed to treat diabetes 
in both Balinese and Indian communities. Limonoids can not be considered the 
only responsible of digestive properties. Further research would be the 
validation of this report by enzymatic tests and the identification of active 
constituents.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.05.014
PMID: 27178630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 Jul 3;154(3):537-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.04.024. Epub 
2014 Apr 25.

Ethnobotany, phytochemistry and pharmacology of Stephania rotunda Lour.

Desgrouas C(1), Taudon N(2), Bun SS(3), Baghdikian B(4), Bory S(5), Parzy D(6), 
Ollivier E(7).

Author information:
(1)UMR-MD3, IRBA, Faculté de Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 
Marseille cedex 5, Aix-Marseille Université, France; UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de 
Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean 
Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, Aix-Marseille Université, France. 
Electronic address: camilledesgrouas@gmail.com.
(2)UMR-MD3, IRBA, BP 7391223, Brétigny sur Orges, France. Electronic address: 
nicolas.taudon@gmail.com.
(3)UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de 
Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, 
Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: sok-siya.bun@univ-amu.fr.
(4)UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de 
Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, 
Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: 
beatrice.baghdikian@univ-amu.fr.
(5)Faculté de Pharmacie, Université des Sciences de la Santé, no. 73, Monivong 
Blvd, Daun Penh, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Electronic address: vireak_sb@yahoo.com.
(6)UMR-MD3, IRBA, Faculté de Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 
Marseille cedex 5, Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: 
daniel.parzy@univ-amu.fr.
(7)UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de 
Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, 
Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: 
evelyne.ollivier@univ-amu.fr.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Stephania rotunda Lour. (Menispermaceae) is an 
important traditional medicinal plant that is grown in Southeast Asia. The 
stems, leaves, and tubers have been used in the Cambodian, Lao, Indian and 
Vietnamese folk medicine systems for years to treat a wide range of ailments, 
including asthma, headache, fever, and diarrhoea.
AIM OF THE REVIEW: To provide an up-to-date, comprehensive overview and analysis 
of the ethnobotany, phytochemistry, and pharmacology of Stephania rotunda for 
its potential benefits in human health, as well as to assess the scientific 
evidence of traditional use and provide a basis for future research directions.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Peer-reviewed articles on Stephania rotunda were acquired 
via an electronic search of the major scientific databases (Pubmed, Google 
Scholar, and ScienceDirect). Data were collected from scientific journals, 
theses, and books.
RESULTS: The traditional uses of Stephania rotunda were recorded in countries 
throughout Southeast Asia (Cambodia, Vietnam, Laos, and India). Different parts 
of Stephania rotunda were used in traditional medicine to treat about twenty 
health disorders. Phytochemical analyses identified forty alkaloids. The roots 
primarily contain l-tetrahydropalmatine (l-THP), whereas the tubers contain 
cepharanthine and xylopinine. Furthermore, the chemical composition differs from 
one region to another and according to the harvest period. The alkaloids 
exhibited approximately ten different pharmacological activities. The main 
pharmacological activities of Stephania rotunda alkaloids are antiplasmodial, 
anticancer, and immunomodulatory effects. Sinomenine, cepharanthine, and 
l-stepholidine are the most promising components and have been tested in humans. 
The pharmacokinetic parameters have been studied for seven compounds, including 
the three most promising compounds. The toxicity has been evaluated for 
liriodenine, roemerine, cycleanine, l-tetrahydropalmatine, and oxostephanine.
CONCLUSION: Stephania rotunda is traditionally used for the treatment of a wide 
range of ailments. Pharmacological investigations have validated different uses 
of Stephania rotunda in folk medicine. The present review highlights the three 
most promising compounds of Stephania rotunda, which could constitute potential 
leads in various medicinal fields, including malaria and cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.04.024
PMID: 24768769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Feb 15;139(3):838-57. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.12.029. 
Epub 2011 Dec 27.

An ethnopharmacological survey of the traditional medicine utilized in the 
community of Porvenir, Bajo Paraguá Indian Reservation, Bolivia.

Hajdu Z(1), Hohmann J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. 
zsanett.hajdu@pharm.u-szeged.hu

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Porvenir is a semi-isolated Indian community in 
the Bajo Paraguá Indian Reservation in Bolivian Amazon, one of the two 
communities of people from the Guarasug'we indigenous nation now close to 
extinction. The aim of our study was the collection of data on the traditional 
medicine utilized in the community, and to identify new subjects for further 
investigation by comparison of the folk-medicinal use with the available 
scientific literature data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Field work was conducted for 5 months, which included 
participant observation, semi-structured interviews with 16 individuals, and the 
collection of voucher specimens for botanical identification. The knowledge of 
the inhabitants relating to medicinal plants was analysed by means of the 
modified method of Gentry and Phillips (1993a,b), which assesses the frequency 
and the variety of use of plants. Scientific data were gathered on selected 
species, and the correlations of the traditional uses of the herbs with 
scientific evidence were assessed.
RESULTS: The lifestyle and beliefs in Porvenir, botanical data on the plants 
used, the frequency and variety of medicinal use, diseases that occur and their 
possible treatment, and methods of plant application are discussed in detail. 
145 plant species were registered with 451 recorded uses. The majority of the 
plants were utilized to treat gastrointestinal complaints (60 species), followed 
by diseases of the central nervous system, pain and fever (37 species), diseases 
of the genitourinary tract (35 species), dermatological disorders (34 species) 
and diseases of the respiratory system (32 species). One fifth of the species 
are also applied in traditional medicine in other areas of Bolivia or in other 
countries. The majority of the 145 species used in the community have not been 
extensively investigated from phytochemical and pharmacological aspects. There 
are no data in the scientific literature on one fifth of the species.
CONCLUSIONS: The medicine applied in Porvenir and the contemporary knowledge of 
the people interviewed concerning plants reflect the local traditions and their 
changes very well, clearly demonstrating the influence exerted by conventional 
medicine, and how the ancestral knowledge is progressively being forgotten. The 
present ethnopharmacological survey indicates that 24 species that are 
frequently and consistently used in the community of Porvenir are perspective 
for further research, as their chemistry and pharmacology have not been 
published to date.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.12.029
PMID: 22222280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Adv Pharmacol Sci. 2014;2014:959830. doi: 10.1155/2014/959830. Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Trapa bispinosa Roxb.: A Review on Nutritional and Pharmacological Aspects.

Adkar P(1), Dongare A(2), Ambavade S(2), Bhaskar VH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, JSPM's Jayawantrao Sawant College of Pharmacy and 
Research, Hadapsar, Pune,Maharashtra 411028, India ; Post Graduates Department 
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, JSPM's Jayawantrao Sawant College of Pharmacy 
and Research, Handewadi Road, Hadapsar, Pune, Maharashtra 411028, India.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, JSPM's Jayawantrao Sawant College of Pharmacy and 
Research, Hadapsar, Pune,Maharashtra 411028, India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Medicinal Chemistry, Gahlot Institute of 
Pharmacy Plot No. 59, Sector No. 14, Koparkhairane, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra 
400709, India.

Trapa bispinosa Roxb. which belongs to the family Trapaceae is a small herb well 
known for its medicinal properties and is widely used worldwide. Trapa bispinosa 
or Trapa natans is an important plant of Indian Ayurvedic system of medicine 
which is used in the problems of stomach, genitourinary system, liver, kidney, 
and spleen. It is bitter, astringent, stomachic, diuretic, febrifuge, and 
antiseptic. The whole plant is used in gonorrhea, menorrhagia, and other genital 
affections. It is useful in diarrhea, dysentery, ophthalmopathy, ulcers, and 
wounds. These are used in the validated conditions in pitta, burning sensation, 
dipsia, dyspepsia, hemorrhage, hemoptysis, diarrhea, dysentery, strangely, 
intermittent fever, leprosy, fatigue, inflammation, urethrorrhea, fractures, 
erysipelas, lumbago, pharyngitis, bronchitis and general debility, and 
suppressing stomach and heart burning. Maybe it is due to photochemical content 
of Trapa bispinosa having high quantity of minerals, ions, namely, Ca, K, Na, 
Zn, and vitamins; saponins, phenols, alkaloids, H-donation, flavonoids are 
reported in the plants. Nutritional and biochemical analyses of fruits of Trapa 
bispinosa in 100 g showed 22.30 and 71.55% carbohydrate, protein contents were 
4.40% and 10.80%, a percentage of moisture, fiber, ash, and fat contents were 
70.35 and 7.30, 2.05 and 6.35, 2.30 and 8.50, and 0.65 and 1.85, mineral 
contents of the seeds were 32 mg and 102.85 mg calcium, 1.4 and 3.8 mg Iron, and 
121 and 325 mg phosphorus in 100 g, and seeds of Trapa bispinosa produced 115.52 
and 354.85 Kcal of energy, in fresh and dry fruits, respectively. Chemical 
analysis of the fruit and fresh nuts having considerable water content citric 
acid and fresh fruit which substantiates its importance as dietary food also 
reported low crude lipid, and major mineral present with confirming good amount 
of minerals as an iron and manganese potassium were contained in the fruit. 
Crude fiber, total protein content of the water chestnut kernel, Trapa bispinosa 
are reported. In this paper, the recent reports on nutritional, phytochemical, 
and pharmacological aspects of Trapa bispinosa Roxb, as a medicinal and 
nutritional food, are reviewed.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/959830
PMCID: PMC3941599
PMID: 24669216


24. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Oct 5;131(3):522-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.07.045. Epub 
2010 Aug 1.

Piper umbellatum L.: a comparative cross-cultural analysis of its medicinal uses 
and an ethnopharmacological evaluation.

Roersch CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Medicina Dominicana, PO Box 160, Santo Domingo, Dominican 
Republic. croersch@imd-medicina-dominicana.org

AIM OF THE STUDY: This review assesses the botany, traditional medicinal uses, 
phytochemistry, pharmacology and toxicology of P. umbellatum.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Information on P. umbellatum was gathered via the 
internet (using Scirus, Google Scholar, CAB-Abstracts, MedlinePlus, Embase, 
Scielo, and Web of Science) and libraries. Additionally, previously unpublished 
work on the traditional uses of P. umbellatum from our National Study of the 
Medicinal Plants of the Dominican Republic has been included.
RESULTS: Piper umbellatum is a Neotropical plant species widely distributed in 
Mexico, Central America, South America and the West Indian Islands. It has also 
been introduced to Africa and South-East Asia. Traditional uses for this plant 
are recorded in 24 countries in three continents, America, Africa and Asia for a 
wide range of ailments such as kidney, women diseases, diarrhea, skin 
affections, burns, rheumatism, malaria, intestinal parasites, inflammation and 
fever. We have analyzed the cross-cultural agreement among traditional uses in 
different countries and found a high degree of consensus for the indications 
kidney/diuretic, stomachache and wounds. Phytochemical studies of P. umbellatum 
have demonstrated the presence of terpenes (mainly found in the essential oil), 
alkaloids, flavonoids, sterols and other classes of secondary metabolites. The 
extracts and pure compounds derived from P. umbellatum show a wide spectrum of 
pharmacological activities including antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, 
analgesic, antioxidant, cytotoxic, antimalarial, antileishmanial, and 
antitrypanosomal activity. A first commercial product is in development, based 
on the plant's protective characteristics against UV irradiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The interesting biological activities of P. umbellatum need further 
research in in vivo experiments and clinical studies. The outcome of these 
investigations will determine the possible development of drugs from P. 
umbellatum.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.07.045
PMID: 20678569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Ethnopharmacol. 2015 Nov 4;174:238-52. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.07.033. Epub 
2015 Jul 26.

An ethnobotanical study of anti-malarial plants among indigenous people on the 
upper Negro River in the Brazilian Amazon.

Frausin G(1), Hidalgo Ade F(2), Lima RB(3), Kinupp VF(4), Ming LC(5), Pohlit 
AM(6), Milliken W(7).

Author information:
(1)Coordenação de Tecnologia e Inovação, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da 
Amazônia, Avenida André Araújo, 2936, Petrópolis, CEP 69067-375 Manaus, 
Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address: ginafrausin@gmail.com.
(2)Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias, Universidade Federal do Amazonas, Avenida 
General Rodrigo Otávio Jordão Ramos, 6200, Coroado I, CEP 69077-000 Manaus, 
Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address: afreitash@gmail.com.
(3)Programa de Pós-graduação em Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Amazonas, 
Avenida General Rodrigo Otavio Jordão Ramos, 6200, Coroado I, CEP 69077-000 
Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address: renatabsl@hotmail.com.
(4)Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia do Amazonas, Avenida 
Ferreira Pena, 1109, Centro, CEP 69025-010 Manaus, Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic 
address: valkinupp@yahoo.com.br.
(5)Faculdade de Ciências Agronômicas, Universidade Estadual Paulista "Júlio de 
Mesquita Filho", Fazenda Experimental Lageado, Rua José Barbosa de Barros, 1780, 
Caixa Postal 237, CEP 18610-307 Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address: 
linming@fca.unesp.br.
(6)Coordenação de Tecnologia e Inovação, Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas da 
Amazônia, Avenida André Araújo, 2936, Petrópolis, CEP 69067-375 Manaus, 
Amazonas, Brazil. Electronic address: ampohlit@inpa.gov.br.
(7)Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3AB, UK. Electronic address: 
w.milliken@kew.org.

BACKGROUND: In this article we present the plants used for the treatment of 
malaria and associated symptoms in Santa Isabel do Rio Negro in the Brazilian 
Amazon. The region has important biological and cultural diversities including 
more than twenty indigenous ethnic groups and a strong history in traditional 
medicine.
OBJECTIVE: The aims of this study are to survey information in the Baniwa, Baré, 
Desana, Piratapuia, Tariana, Tukano, Tuyuca and Yanomami ethnic communities and 
among caboclos (mixed-ethnicity) on (a) plant species used for the treatment of 
malaria and associated symptoms, (b) dosage forms and (c) distribution of these 
anti-malarial plants in the Amazon.
METHODS: Information was obtained through classical ethnobotanical and 
ethnopharmacological methods from interviews with 146 informants in Santa Isabel 
municipality on the upper Negro River, Brazil.
RESULTS: Fifty-five mainly native neotropical plant species from 34 families 
were in use. The detailed uses of these plants were documented. The result was 
187 records (64.5%) of plants for the specific treatment of malaria, 51 records 
(17.6%) of plants used in the treatment of liver problems and 29 records (10.0%) 
of plants used in the control of fevers associated with malaria. Other uses 
described were blood fortification ('dar sangue'), headache and prophylaxis. 
Most of the therapeutic preparations were decoctions and infusions based on stem 
bark, root bark and leaves. These were administered by mouth. In some cases, 
remedies were prepared with up to three different plant species. Also, plants 
were used together with other ingredients such as insects, mammals, gunpowder 
and milk.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study on the anti-malarial plants from this region 
of the Amazon. Aspidosperma spp. and Ampelozizyphus amazonicus Ducke were the 
most cited species in the communities surveyed. These species have experimental 
proof supporting their anti-malarial efficacy. The dosage of the therapeutic 
preparations depends on the kind of plant, quantity of plant material available, 
the patient's age (children and adults) and the local expert. The treatment time 
varies from a single dose to up to several weeks. Most anti-malarial plants are 
domesticated or grow spontaneously. They are grown in home gardens, open areas 
near the communities, clearings and secondary forests, and wild species grow in 
areas of seasonally flooded wetlands and terra firme ('solid ground') forest, in 
some cases in locations that are hard to access. Traditional knowledge of plants 
was found to be falling into disuse presumably as a consequence of the local 
official health services that treat malaria in the communities using commercial 
drugs. Despite this, some species are used in the prevention of this disease and 
also in the recovery after using conventional anti-malarial drugs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.07.033
PMID: 26216513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Ethnopharmacol. 2005 Jan 15;96(3):389-401. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2004.08.032.

Medical ethnobotany of the Teribes of Bocas del Toro, Panama.

Gupta MP(1), Solís PN, Calderón AI, Guionneau-Sinclair F, Correa M, Galdames C, 
Guerra C, Espinosa A, Alvenda GI, Robles G, Ocampo R.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Farmacognósticas de la Flora Panameña (CIFLORPAN), 
Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad de Panamá, Apartado 10767, Estafeta 
Universitaria, Republica de Panamá. cytedqff@ancom.up.ac.pa

Erratum in
    J Ethnopharmacol. 2005 Apr 8;98(1-2):221. Guinneau-Sinclair, F [corrected to 
Guionneau-Sinclair, F].

Ethnomedical uses of 108 medicinal plant species, belonging to 52 families, 89 
genera, used by the Teribe Amerindians of Bocas del Toro Province in Panama, 
along with their socio-cultural practices are reported here. The methods of 
administration of the herbal remedies, the plant parts used, their families and 
local names are also documented. The recorded medicinal plants were used mainly 
for fever, various type of pain and inflammation. The potential value of 26 
plants and their traditional uses was elucidated through literature search.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2004.08.032
PMID: 15619557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Rev Neurol. 2009 Aug 1-15;49(3):149-55.

[Neurological aspects described in The treasure of medicines for all illnesses 
by Gregorio López].

[Article in Spanish]

Carod-Artal FJ(1), Vázquez-Cabrera CB.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Sarah, Brasilia DF, Brasil. 
fjcarod-artal@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Latin American medicine in the 16th century produced the first 
collections of herbs with native plants from the New World. Treatises on popular 
therapies appeared, which included gallenic remedies as well as incorporating 
autochthonous plants. We review the main neurological diseases and their 
treatments described in The Treasure of Medicines for All Illnesses by Gregorio 
Lopez (1542-1596).
DEVELOPMENT: Some critics claim that his work was an enumeration of empirical 
prescriptions, sometimes with a magico-religious influence, which was extended 
in successive reprints. Yet, this manuscript is probably the first treatise on 
therapeutics written by a European in the New World to describe the native 
remedies employed in the treatment of diseases. In the section entitled Remedies 
in alphabetical order the following neurological ailments and appropriate 
remedies to treat them are described: abscess, apoplexy, brain, chilling, cramp, 
gota coral or epilepsy, headache, melancholy, memory, migraine, nerves, palsy, 
paralysis, sciatica, stupor and vertigo. The list of diseases is very complete 
and includes syndromes ranging from fevers, colics and bruises to phthisis, 
scabs or burns. The copy of the manuscript in the Vatican contains a final 
section on Indian medicines, which includes a list of medicinal plants used at 
that time, with the names given in Nahuatl language.
CONCLUSIONS: Headaches, epilepsy and conditions affecting the peripheral nerves 
were the neurological pathologies that were described at greatest length in The 
Treasure of Medicines for All Illnesses, and for which a greater number of 
natural prescriptions were compiled.

PMID: 19621310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed. 2006 Oct 10;2:44. doi: 10.1186/1746-4269-2-44.

Traditional medicinal plant use in Loja province, Southern Ecuador.

Bussmann RW(1), Sharon D.

Author information:
(1)University of Hawaii, Lyon Arboretum, 3860 Manoa Rd,, Honolulu, HI 96822, 
USA. bussmann@hawaii.edu

This paper examines the traditional use of medicinal plants in Loja province, 
Southern Ecuador.Two hundred fifteen plant species were collected, identified 
and their vernacular names and traditional uses recorded. This number of species 
indicates that the healers, market vendors and members of the public interviewed 
still have a very high knowledge of plants in their surroundings, which can be 
seen as a reflection of the knowledge of the population in general. However, the 
area represents only an outlier of the larger Northern Peruvian cultural area, 
where more than 500 species of plants are used medicinally, indicating that in 
Ecuador much of the original plant knowledge has already been lost.Most plant 
species registered are only used medicinally, and only a few species have any 
other use (construction, fodder, food). The highest number of species is used 
for the treatment of "magical" (psychosomatic) ailments (39 species), followed 
by respiratory disorders (34), problems of the urinary tract (28), Fever/Malaria 
(25), Rheumatism (23) and nervous system problems (20).

DOI: 10.1186/1746-4269-2-44
PMCID: PMC1615866
PMID: 17032450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Med Assoc Thai. 2016 Jul;99 Suppl 4:S102-9.

Cytotoxic, Anti-inflammatory and Antioxidant Activities of Heliotropium indicum 
Extracts.

Chunthorng-Orn J, Dechayont B, Phuaklee P, Prajuabjinda O, Juckmeta T, Itharat 
A.

BACKGROUND: Heliotropium indicum Linn., or ‘Indian heliotrope’ is very common in 
India with a long history of traditional medicinal uses in many countries in the 
world. In Thailand, the plant has been traditionally use to cure various 
diseases such as fever, insect bites, stings, diarrhea, skin rashes, menstrual 
disorder and urticaria. In addition, the plant is commonly used by Thai folk 
doctors as a component in remedies for treatment of lung cancer.
OBJECTIVE: In the present study, we investigated cytotoxicity against two types 
of lung cancer cell lines (A549 and NCI-H226), anti-inflammatory effect and 
antioxidant activity of Heliotropium indicum extracts.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The water and ethanolic extracts of Heliotropium indicum 
were tested. The cytotoxic activity against two types of human lung cancer cell 
lines (A549 and NCI-H226) was evaluated by sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. The 
antiinflammatory effect was investigated on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated 
RAW 264.7 macrophages. LPS-induced nitric oxide (NO) production was determined 
by Griess reagent. The antioxidant activity was performed by 1, 
1-diphenyl-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging method.
RESULTS: The ethanolic extract showed cytotoxic activity only against NCI-H226 
(IC50 = 51.90±2.35 μg/ml) whereas the water extract had no cytotoxic activity 
against both A549 and NCI-H226 (IC50 >100 μg/ml). For anti-inflammatory effect, 
the results revealed that the ethanolic extract exhibited the most potent 
inhibitory activity on nitric oxide production (IC50 = 24.17±2.12 μg/ml), 
followed by Indomethacin (positive control) with an IC50 value of 34.67±6.23 
μg/ml while water extract was apparently inactive (IC50 >100 μg/ml). For 
antioxidant activity, the ethanolic extract showed high antioxidant activity 
(EC50 = 28.91±4.26 μg/ml) but the water extract showed no antioxidant activity 
(EC50 >100 μg/ml).
CONCLUSION: These results can support using Heliotropium indicum Linn. for 
component in lung cancer remedy by Thai folk doctors. However, more studies are 
required.

PMID: 29919994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Sep 28;143(2):540-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.07.014. Epub 
2012 Jul 24.

Quantitative ethnobotany of traditional Siddha medical practitioners from 
Radhapuram taluk of Tirunelveli District, Tamil Nadu, India.

Chellappandian M(1), Mutheeswaran S, Pandikumar P, Duraipandiyan V, Ignacimuthu 
S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Ethnopharmacology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, 
Nungambakkam, Chennai 600 034, India.

ETHNOBOTANICAL RELEVANCE: The aim of the present study was to document the 
knowledge of traditional Siddha medical practitioners from Radhapuram taluk of 
Tirunelveli district in Tamil Nadu, India, and to quantitatively analyze the 
data to identify some useful leads for further studies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Successive free listing was the method adopted for the 
interview. In this study, 84 traditional Siddha medical practitioners were 
included and their knowledge on medicinal plants was gathered. The data were 
assessed with the help of two indices viz., Informant Consensus Factor (F(ic)) 
and Informant Agreement on Remedies (IAR).
RESULTS: The present survey is in accordance with some of the aspects of our 
previous surveys. Regarding the demography of the informants, it exhibited 
unevenness in male-female ratio and majority of the informants were poorly 
educated. Practicing this system of medicine as part time job by majority of the 
informants might indicate the reduced social status of this medicinal system. 
The present study had recorded the usage of 217 species which were used to 
prepare 448 formulations, which in turn yielded 812 use reports. Conversion of 
use reports had yielded a total of 625 claims and 84.16% of the claims were 
'singletons'. The illness category 'adjuvants' holds a high F(ic) value. Among 
the other illness categories, kapha ailments and dermatological ailments have a 
high percentage of use-reports. Ailments of blood, jaundice and fever were the 
other illness categories with high F(ic) values. Some of the claims viz., Mukia 
madarasepatana (kapha ailments), Mollugo nudicaulis (febrifuge), Indigofera 
asphalathoides (dermatological ailments), Aerva lanata (urinary ailments), 
Abutilon indicum (hemorrhoids) and Hybanthus enneaspermus (aphrodisiac), which 
have relatively high consensus can be taken up for further biomedical studies, 
since no substantial studies have been conducted on them.
CONCLUSION: One of the major aims of National Rural Health Mission is to 
implement traditional Indian system of medicines into the main stream. In such 
scenario, scientific validation of community-based local health traditions 
becomes necessary for their rational implementation. Through this study we have 
highlighted some claims which are at high use in the study area but having 
little scientific support. Studies on such claims will provide scientific base 
which in turn will be useful to improve the health of indigenous people.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.07.014
PMID: 22835815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Parasitol. 2008 Nov;38(13):1505-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2008.05.007. 
Epub 2008 May 27.

Ampelozyziphus amazonicus Ducke (Rhamnaceae), a medicinal plant used to prevent 
malaria in the Amazon Region, hampers the development of Plasmodium berghei 
sporozoites.

Andrade-Neto VF(1), Brandão MG, Nogueira F, Rosário VE, Krettli AU.

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Malária, Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou/FIOCRUZ, Av. Augusto 
de Lima 1715, CEP 30190-002, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.

Most medicinal plants used against malaria in endemic areas aim to treat the 
acute symptoms of the disease such as high temperature fevers with periodicity 
and chills. In some endemic areas of the Brazilian Amazon region one medicinal 
plant seems to be an exception: Ampelozyziphus amazonicus, locally named "Indian 
beer" or "Saracura-mira", used to prevent the disease when taken daily as a cold 
suspension of powdered dried roots. In previous work we found no activity of the 
plant extracts against malaria blood parasites in experimentally infected 
animals (mice and chickens) or in cultures of Plasmodium falciparum. However, in 
infections induced by sporozoites, chickens treated with plant extracts were 
partially protected against Plasmodium gallinaceum and showed reduced numbers of 
exoerythrocytic forms in the brain. We now present stronger evidence that the 
ethanolic extract of "Indian beer" roots hampers in vitro and in vivo 
development of Plasmodium berghei sporozoites, a rodent malaria parasite. Some 
mice treated with high doses of the plant extract did not become infected after 
sporozoite inoculation, whereas others had a delayed prepatent period and lower 
parasitemia. Our data validates the use of "Indian beer" as a remedy for malaria 
prophylaxis in the Amazon, where the plant exists and the disease represents an 
important problem which is difficult to control. Studies aiming to identify the 
active compounds responsible for the herein described causal prophylactic 
activity are needed and may lead to a new antimalarial prophylactic.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2008.05.007
PMID: 18599059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Curr Top Med Chem. 2020 Jun 18. doi: 10.2174/1568026620666200618123026. Online 
ahead of print.

Identification of potential inhibitors for targets involved in Dengue fever.

Shanmugam A(1), Ramakrishnan C(2), Velmurugan D(3), Gromiha MM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Vinayaka Mission's Kirupananda 
Variyar Engineering College, Vinayaka Mission's Research Foundation (Deemed to 
be University), Salem - 636308. India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences, 
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras, Chennai - 600036. India.
(3)Centre of Advanced Study in Crystallography and Biophysics, University of 
Madras, Guindy Campus, Chennai - 600025. India.

Lethality due to dengue infection is a global threat. Nearly 400 million people 
are affected every year, which approximately costs 500 million dollar for 
surveillance and vector control itself. Many investigations on 
structure-function relationship of proteins expressed by the dengue virus are 
being made for more than a decade and had come up with many reports on small 
molecule drug discovery. In this review, we present a detailed note on viral 
proteins and their functions as well as the inhibitors discovered/designed so 
far using experimental and computational methods. Further, the phytoconstituents 
from medicinal plants, specifically the extract of the papaya leaves, neem and 
bael, which combat dengue infection via dengue protease, helicase, methyl 
transferase and polymerase will be summarized.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1568026620666200618123026
PMID: 32552652


33. Indian J Exp Biol. 2002 Jul;40(7):765-73.

Validation of traditional claim of Tulsi, Ocimum sanctum Linn. as a medicinal 
plant.

Gupta SK(1), Prakash J, Srivastava S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi 110 029, India. skgup@hotmail.com

In several ancient systems of medicine including Ayurveda, Greek, Roman, Siddha 
and Unani, Ocimum sanctum has vast number of therapeutic applications such as in 
cardiopathy, haemopathy, leucoderma, asthma, bronchitis, catarrhal fever, 
otalgia, hepatopathy, vomiting, lumbago, hiccups, ophthalmia, gastropathy, 
genitourinary disorders, ringworm, verminosis and skin diseases etc. The present 
review incorporates the description of O. sanctum plant, its chemical 
constituents, and various pharmacological activities.

PMID: 12597545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Oct 7;149(3):797-802. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.08.003. 
Epub 2013 Aug 14.

Antimalarial and safety evaluation of Pluchea lanceolata (DC.) Oliv. & Hiern: 
in-vitro and in-vivo study.

Mohanty S(1), Srivastava P, Maurya AK, Cheema HS, Shanker K, Dhawan S, Darokar 
MP, Bawankule DU.

Author information:
(1)In-Vivo Testing Laboratory, Molecular Bioprospection Department, CSIR-Central 
Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow 226015, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Many of the effective therapeutic strategies 
have been derived from ethnopharmacologically used natural products. Pluchea 
lanceolata is an herb employed in Indian folk medicine for malaria like fever 
but it lacks proper pharmacological intervention.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate antimalarial and safety profile of Pluchea 
lanceolata: an in-vitro, in-vivo for its ethnopharmacological validation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methanol, butanol, ethyl acetate, chloroform, hexane 
extracts and its isolate, taraxasterol acetate (TxAc) were obtained from air 
dried aerial part of Pluchea lanceolata. These were tested in-vitro against 
chloroquine-sensitive strain of Plasmodium falciparum NF54 by measuring the 
parasite specific lactate dehydrogenase activity. The most potent hexane extract 
and TxAc were further validated for in-vivo antimalarial and safety evaluation. 
TxAc, a pentacyclic-triterpene isolated from the most active fraction was 
further evaluated with special emphasis on inflammatory mediators involved in 
malaria pathogenesis. Murine malaria was induced by intra-peritoneal injection 
of Plasmodium berghei infected red blood cells to the male Swiss inbred mice. 
Mice were orally treated following Peters 4-Day suppression test. In-vivo 
antimalarial efficacy was examined by evaluating the parasitaemia, percent 
survival, mean survival time, blood glucose, haemoglobin and pro-inflammatory 
mediators involved in malaria pathogenesis.
RESULTS: Hexane extract and TxAc showed promising antimalarial activity in-vitro 
and in-vivo condition. TxAc attributed in inhibition of the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines as well as afford to significant increase in the blood glucose and 
haemoglobin level when compared with vehicle treated infected mice. We have not 
observed the synergistic action of combinations of chloroquine and TxAc from our 
experimental results. In-vitro and in-vivo safety evaluation study revealed that 
hexane extract is non toxic at higher concentration.
CONCLUSION: Present study further validates the ancient Indian traditional 
knowledge and use of Pluchea lanceolata as an antimalarial agent. Study confirms 
the suitability of Pluchea lanceolata as a candidate for further studies to 
obtain a prototype for antimalarial medicine.

© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.08.003
PMID: 23954323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Indian J Exp Biol. 1999 Apr;37(4):411-4.

Antipyretic activity of Cardiospermum halicacabum.

Asha VV(1), Pushpangadan P.

Author information:
(1)Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thiruvananthapuram, India.

Cardiospermum halicacabum extracts have been evaluated for their antipyretic 
activity against yeast-induced pyrexia in rats. The ethanol as well as n-hexane 
extracts (400 mg/kg) of the whole plant powder showed potent antipyretic 
activity. The water extract was devoid of significant activity. The antipyretic 
activity of the ethanol extract was concentration dependent.

PMID: 10641181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Indian J Med Sci. 2000 Mar;54(3):102-5.

Antibacterial effect of some leaf extracts on Salmonella typhi.

Gehlot D(1), Bohra A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany, JN Vyas University, Jodhpur.

Aqueous and methanol extracts of fresh leaves of twenty desert plants of 
Rajasthan state were tested for their antibacterial activity against human 
pathogenic bacteria Salmonella typhi, causal organism of typhoid fever in human 
beings. 10% concentrate extracts of leaves of various plant species were used 
for testing antibacterial potential. Five plant species were found to have 
inhibitory effect against the organism. Fagonia cretica leaf extracts were found 
most effective against Salmonella typhi.

PMID: 11227613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nat Prod Res. 2015;29(16):1575-7. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2014.985679. Epub 2014 
Dec 6.

Anti-leptospiral activities of an endemic plant Glyptopetalum calocarpum (Kurz.) 
Prain used as a medicinal plant by Nicobarese of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

Chander MP(1), Kumar KV, Shriram AN, Vijayachari P.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Medical Microbiology & Molecular Biology , Regional Medical 
Research Centre (Indian Council of Medical Research), WHO Collaborating Centre 
for Diagnosis, Reference, Research and Training in Leptospirosis , Post Bag No. 
13, Dollygunj, Port Blair 744101 , Andaman and Nicobar Islands , India.

Leaves of an endemic plant Glyptopetalum calocarpum are used by Nicobarese 
tribes of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, India, to prepare traditional medicine 
for treating fever. In the present investigation, pharmacologically active 
compounds were isolated from this plant and their antimicrobial efficacy was 
evaluated against the leptospiral strains. The anti-leptospiral activity of six 
plant-derived compounds was determined by both microdilution and macrodilution 
methods. Two out of six compounds, namely lupenone and stigmasterol, showed 
anti-leptospiral activity. The minimum inhibitory concentrations of the two 
compounds tested against pathogenic leptospiral strains belonging to 10 serovars 
were in the range of 100-200 μg/mL. The range of minimum bactericidal 
concentrations was 400-800 μg/mL. Compounds lupenone, stigmasterol, lupeol, 
β-amyrin and β-amyrin acetate had negligible or no haemolytic activity, 
exhibiting IC50 values of greater than 5 mg/mL. Further in vivo studies are 
needed to investigate the pharmacological and toxicological properties of G. 
calocarpum before it can be considered as a new anti-leptospiral agent.

DOI: 10.1080/14786419.2014.985679
PMID: 25482276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J R Soc Health. 1993 Aug;113(4):190-4. doi: 10.1177/146642409311300409.

Exploration of the frontiers of tradomedical practices: basis for development of 
alternative medical healthcare services in developing countries.

Osujih M(1).

Author information:
(1)Rivers State College of Education, Port Harcourt, Nigeria.

The study is a brief exploration of the functions and roles of the traditional 
healers in the total health care delivery system as a basis for tapping the 
salient features of this age old art: for the purpose of refining, and 
establishing it as an alternative medical health-care service. The investigation 
is considered relevant particularly in the developing countries where, in 
addition to the dearth of orthodox medical services, institutions and personnel, 
it is relatively cheaper, socio-culturally accessible and acceptable. Refining 
and developing some aspects of the traditional healers' services will serve the 
interest of the health consumers whose main concern is with service and not the 
source. Furthermore, it is hoped that the study will stimulate purposeful 
discussions on the need for an unbiased examination of the materials, methods 
and techniques of the traditional healers including, eventually, compiling a 
native pharmacopoeia. A more comprehensive account of the traditional healers 
contributions to the battle against diseases and maintenance of health and well 
being is envisaged.

PIP: In traditional healing, practitioners use barks, leaves, nuts, fruit juices 
and roots, and parts of domestic animals. They practice their craft mostly in 
Africa, Asia, and other Third World countries, and they are variously called 
juju priests, diviners, herbalists, and witch doctors. Cases of achievements in 
their contributions to preventive and curative health have been documented. In 
Nigeria, clients regularly patronize both orthodox and traditional medical 
practitioners. Their remedies include healing the bite of the very poisonous 
carpet viper, chronic bronchitis, peptic ulcer, and heart problems, as well as 
performing uvulectomy and tonsillectomy. Quinine, the cure for malaria, was 
originally the ritual medicine of the Incas of Peru. It was confirmed that 
Azadirachta Indica (Meliaceae), the neem tree, used against malaria in Nigeria, 
India, and Asia, had a potent antiplasmodial activity. The plant Streblus asper, 
Linn (Shakhotoha Siora) is well known in Indian Ayurvedic medicine to treat 
fever, filariasis, dysentery, and diarrhea. The alkaloids derived from the 
Madagascan periwinkle Catharanthus roseus (Apocynaceae), used in a West Indian 
remedy for diabetes mellitus, have antitumor activity. The drug Maytensine, 
obtained from Mytenus ovatus Loes (Celastraceae), was found to be a powerful 
antitumor agent in animals. Tea made from the leaves of Osyris wightiana 
stimulated the flow of breast milk and also acted as a labor-inducing agent. 
Saponaria officinalis and Enterobbium cyclocarpum are both used in Egypt and 
Tanzania as spermicide contraceptives. A 1985 survey in Cross River State, 
Nigeria, demonstrated that 165 (61%) of respondents went to traditional healers 
for treatment. Part of their continued popularity is the person-centered 
approach that is virtually lacking in orthodox hospitals, although this 
humanistic approach to therapy is gradually gaining inroads into Western medical 
education. The services of both kinds of medicine could be harmonized by 
open-minded appraisal, identification of positive aspects, and acceptance of 
their complimentary nature.

DOI: 10.1177/146642409311300409
PMID: 8410912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 2012 Dec;49(6):463-7.

Anti-inflammatory and antipyretic activities of the ethanolic extract of Shorea 
robusta Gaertn. f. resin.

Wani TA(1), Chandrashekara HH, Kumar D, Prasad R, Sardar KK, Kumar D, Tandan SK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, Izatnagar-243 122 (U.P), India.

Shorea robusta Gaertn. f. (Sal) is one of the most important traditional Indian 
medicinal plants. The resin of the plant has been used in the treatment of 
inflammation in folklore medicine. In the present study, ethanolic extract (70%) 
of S. robusta resin (SRE) was investigated for its anti-inflammatory and 
antipyretic activities. Acute inflammation was produced by carrageenan-induced 
hind paw edema and sub-acute by cotton pellet-induced granuloma in male Wistar 
rats. The antipyretic activity of SRE was studied using Brewer's yeast-induced 
pyrexia in rats. The rats were divided into five groups with five animals in 
each group. Group I was treated with vehicle i.e. 1% v/v Tween-80 and served as 
control. Groups II to IV were treated with three different doses of SRE (30, 100 
and 300 mg/kg orally). Group V was treated with standard drug etoricoxib (10 
mg/kg orally). The anti-inflammatory activity of SRE was assessed by per cent 
reduction in edema volume of carrageenan-induced hind paw edema and by per cent 
decrease in granuloma formation in cotton pellet-induced granuloma test. SRE 
(100 and 300 mg/kg) produced a significant reduction in edema volume and 
decrease in granulation tissue formation in rats. Significant reduction in 
pyrexia was observed at all the dose levels of SRE i.e. 30, 100 and 300 mg/kg. 
The results of the present study demonstrated anti-inflammatory and antipyretic 
activities of S. robusta resin and supported its traditional therapeutic use in 
painful inflammatory conditions and fever.

PMID: 23350282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 May 2;147(1):84-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.02.009. Epub 
2013 Mar 14.

Hemidesmus indicus induces apoptosis as well as differentiation in a human 
promyelocytic leukemic cell line.

Ferruzzi L(1), Turrini E, Burattini S, Falcieri E, Poli F, Mandrone M, Sacchetti 
G, Tacchini M, Guerrini A, Gotti R, Hrelia P, Cantelli-Forti G, Fimognari C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and BioTechnology, Alma Mater Studiorum-University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The decoction of the roots of Hemidesmus indicus 
is widely used in the Indian traditional medicine for the treatment of blood 
diseases, dyspepsia, loss of taste, dyspnea, cough, poison, menorrhagia, fever, 
and diarrhea. Poly-herbal preparations containing Hemidesmus are often used by 
traditional medical practitioners for the treatment of cancer. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the cytodifferentiative, cytostatic and cytotoxic 
potential of a decoction of Hemidesmus indicus's roots (0.31-3 mg/mL) on a human 
promyelocytic leukemia cell line (HL-60).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The decoction of Hemidesmus indicus was characterized by 
HPLC to quantify its main phytomarkers. Induction of apoptosis, cell-cycle 
analysis, levels of specific membrane differentiation markers were evaluated by 
flow cytometry. The analysis of cell differentiation by nitroblue tetrazolium 
(NBT) reducing activity, adherence to the plastic substrate, α-napthyl acetate 
esterase activity and morphological analysis was performed through light 
microscopy (LM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
RESULTS: Starting from the concentration of 0.31 mg/ml, Hemidesmus indicus 
induced cytotoxicity and altered cell-cycle progression, through a block in the 
G0/G1 phase. The decoction caused differentiation of HL-60 cells as shown by NBT 
reducing activity, adherence to the plastic substrate, α-naphtyl acetate 
esterase activity, and increasing expression of CD14 and CD15. The morphological 
analysis by LM and TEM clearly showed the presence of granulocytes and 
macrophages after Hemidesmus indicus treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The cytodifferentiating, cytotoxic and cytostatic activities of 
Hemidesmus indicus offers a scientific basis for its use in traditional 
medicine. Its potent antileukemic activity provides a pre-clinical evidence for 
its traditional use in anticancer pharmacology. Further experiments are 
worthwhile to determine the in vivo anticancer potential of this plant decoction 
and its components.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.02.009
PMID: 23500881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. South Med J. 1976 Jul;69(7):938-40. doi: 10.1097/00007611-197607000-00045.

Medicine among the ancient Maya.

Garcia-Kutzbach A.

Medicine among the ancient Mayas was a blend of religion and science. It was 
practiced by priests who inherited their position and received extensive 
education. The Mayas sutured wounds with human hair, reduced fractures, and used 
casts. They were skillful dental surgeons and made prostheses from jade and 
turquoise and filled teeth with iron pyrite. Three clinical diseases, pinta, 
leishmaniasis, and yellow fever, and several psychiatric syndromes were 
described.

DOI: 10.1097/00007611-197607000-00045
PMID: 781854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Oct 11;137(3):1504-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.08.038. 
Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Anti-inflammatory, analgesic and antipyretic properties of Thespesia populnea 
Soland ex. Correa seed extracts and its fractions in animal models.

Shah AS(1), Alagawadi KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, KLEU's College of Pharmacy, Belgaum, 
Karnataka, India. amol2473@indiatimes.com

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Thespesia populnea Sol. ex Correa (Malvaceae) is 
commonly known as "Indian tulip tree". The plant has been used as an astringent, 
antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antinociceptive and hepatoprotective in Indian 
system of traditional medicine.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thespesia populnea seeds were successively extracted by 
soxhlet extraction using petroleum ether (40-60 °C) (TPO) and ethanol (TPE). 
Unsaponifiable matter (TPOUM) and fatty acids were separated from seed oil. A 
GC-MS analysis of fatty acid methyl esters was carried out. Ethanolic extract 
was fractionated using CHCl(3), EtOAc, n-BuOH and H(2)O. Acute arthritis was 
induced by sub-plantar injection of carrageenan into the left hind paw of rats. 
The paw volume was measured using plethysmometer. Analgesic activity was 
assessed by heat induced pains (tail immersion model) and antipyretic activity 
assessed using brewers yeast-induced pyrexia model.
RESULTS: Oral administration of TPO and TPE at 200 and 400 mg/kg b.w. and tested 
fractions at 200mg/kg significantly reduced carrageenan induced paw edema and 
brewers yeast-induced pyrexia. In tail immersion method also extracts and 
fractions showed significant analgesic activity. Amongst all fractions EtOAc 
showed most significant results. TPOUM showed significant anti-inflammatory and 
analgesic activity. GC-MS analyses showed the presence of fourteen fatty acids, 
predominant fatty acids were palmitic and stearic acid.
CONCLUSION: These results highlighted anti-inflammatory, analgesic and 
antipyretic effects of Thespesia populnea seeds.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.08.038
PMID: 21893182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Epidemiol Infect. 2008 Feb;136(2):196-206. doi: 10.1017/S0950268807008424. Epub 
2007 Apr 16.

Retrospective survey of Chikungunya disease in Réunion Island hospital staff.

Staikowsky F(1), Le Roux K, Schuffenecker I, Laurent P, Grivard P, Develay A, 
Michault A.

Author information:
(1)Service des Urgences, Groupe Hospitalier Sud Réunion, La Réunion, France.

Réunion Island (Indian Ocean) has been suffering from its first known 
Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) epidemic since February 2005. To achieve a better 
understanding of the disease, a questionnaire was drawn up for hospital staff 
members and their household. CHIKV infected about one-third of the studied 
population, the proportion increasing with age and being higher in women. 
Presence of a garden was associated with CHIKV infection. The geographical 
distribution of cases was concordant with insect vector Aedes albopictus 
distribution. The main clinical signs were arthralgia and fever. The disease 
evolved towards full recovery in 34.4% of cases, a relapse in 55.6%, or a 
chronic form in 10%. Paracetamol was used as a painkiller in 95% of cases, 
sometimes associated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, corticoids, or 
traditional herbal medicine. The survey provided valuable information on the 
factors that favour transmission, the clinical signs, the importance of relapses 
and the therapies used.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268807008424
PMCID: PMC2870803
PMID: 17433130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006 Nov 24;108(2):228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.05.018. 
Epub 2006 May 26.

In vitro anti-proliferative and antioxidant studies on Devil's Club Oplopanax 
horridus.

Tai J(1), Cheung S, Cheah S, Chan E, Hasman D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Pediatrics, Center for Complementary Medicine 
Research, BC Child and Family Research Institute, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. jtai@interchange.ubc.ca

Devil's Club, Oplopanax horridus (OH), is a widely used folk medicine in Alaska 
and British Columbia for treating a variety of ailments including arthritis, 
fever and diabetes. HPLC profiling shows that numerous compounds are present in 
the 70% ethanolic extract of OH dry root bark powder. OH extract inhibited K562, 
HL60, MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cell growth with the 50% inhibition (IC(50)) estimated 
at 1/2700, 1/1700, 1/500 and 1/2500 dilutions, respectively. Non-cytotoxic 
concentrations (<IC(50)) of OH extract combined with non-cytotoxic 
concentrations (<IC(50)) of camptothecin (CAM) or paclitaxel (PTX) were tested 
on the tumor cell lines. Of the 19 combinations tested, 9 showed additive or 
synergistic anti-proliferative effect while the rest showed antagonistic effect. 
Combination of OH extract at 1/4000 and 1/16,000 dilutions with 0.1 microM of 
CAM produced additive, anti-proliferative effects on K562 cells, as did 1/2000 
and 1/1000 dilutions of OH combined with 2.5 nM of PTX on MCF7, and 1/4000 
dilution of OH with 1 nM of PTX on MDA-MB-468 cells. Combination of 1/8000 and 
1/4000 dilution of OH with 0.05 microM of CAM showed strong synergistic 
anti-proliferative effects on HL60 cells. At non-cytotoxic 1/4000 dilution, OH 
induced 13.1% of HL60 cells to differentiate into granulocytes but had no effect 
on monocyte/macrophage differentiation. A cell free hydroxyl radical scavenging 
assay estimated that OH at 1/100, 1/10 and 1/5 dilutions showed activities 
equivalent to 2.7, 15.7 and 25.6 microM of Trolox, respectively. At 
non-cytotoxic 1/4000 and 1/2000 dilutions, OH significantly reduced nitric oxide 
production by lipopolysaccharide activated RAW 264.7 cells (p<0.001). Our data 
show that the ethanolic extract of OH has anti-proliferative on several cancer 
cell lines, and has strong antioxidant activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.05.018
PMID: 16814500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013 Oct 20;13:273. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-273.

Umbelliferone β-D-galactopyranoside from Aegle marmelos (L.) corr. an 
ethnomedicinal plant with antidiabetic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidative 
activity.

Kumar V(1), Ahmed D, Verma A, Anwar F, Ali M, Mujeeb M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, Sam 
Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture, Technology & Sciences, Allahabad, Uttar 
Pradesh 211007, India. phvikas@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr. (Rutaceae), commonly known as bael, is 
used to treat fevers, abdomen pain, palpitation of the heart, urinary troubles, 
melancholia, anorexia, dyspepsia, diabetes and diarrhea in Indian traditional 
systems of medicine. The object of the present study was to evaluate the 
antidiabetic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidant oxidative stress of 
umbelliferone β-D-galactopyranoside (UFG) from stem bark of Aegle marmelos 
Correa. in STZ (streptozotocin) induced diabetic rat.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in rat by single intraperitoneal injection of STZ 
(60 mg/kg). The rat was divided into the following groups; I - normal control, 
II - diabetic control, III - UFG (10 mg/kg), IV - UFG (20 mg/kg), V - UFG (40 
mg/kg), VI - Glibenclamide (10 mg/kg, p.o., once a daily dose). Diabetes was 
measured by change the level blood glucose, plasma insulin and the oxidative 
stress were assessed in the liver by estimation of the level of antioxidant 
markers i.e. superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), catalase 
(CAT) and Malondialdehyde (MDA) and antihyperlipidemic effect was measured by 
estimation of total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL (low density lipoprotein) 
cholesterol, HDL (high density lipoprotein) cholesterol, VLDL (very low density 
lipoprotein) cholesterol. However in a study, the increased body weight was 
observed and utilization of glucose was in the oral glucose tolerance test.
RESULT: Daily oral administration of different dose of UFG for 28 days showed 
significantly (P < 0.001) decreased in fasting blood glucose level and improve 
plasma insulin level as compared to the diabetic control group. Also it 
significantly (P < 0.001) decreased the level of glycated hemoglobin, 
glucose-6-phosphatase, fructose-1-6-biphosphate and increased the level of 
hexokinase. UFG treatment decreased liver MDA and increased the level of SOD, 
GPx and CAT. UFG treatment of lipids it's increased the level of cholesterol, 
triglycerides, VLDL, LDL cholesterol and decreased the level of HDL cholesterol. 
Histologically, inflammatory cell in blood vessels, intercalated disc, fat 
degeneration and focal necrosis observed in diabetic rat organ but was less 
obvious in UFG treated groups. The mechanism of action of UFG may be due to the 
increased level of pancreatic insulin secretion and effect on the antioxidant 
marker.
CONCLUSION: UFG posses an antidiabetic, antioxidant and antihyperlipidemic 
effect on the STZ induced diabetic rat. Hence it could be the better choice to 
cure the diabetes.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-273
PMCID: PMC3833852
PMID: 24138888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Trop Doct. 1997;27 Suppl 1:20-5. doi: 10.1177/00494755970270S108.

Malaria and antimalarial plants in Roraima, Brazil.

Milliken W(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Economic Botany, Royal-Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey, UK.

One of the numerous problems created by the gold rush which took place in 
northern Brazil (Roraima State) at the end of the 1980s was a severe epidemic of 
malaria amongst the indigenous peoples of the region. Worst hit were the 
Yanomami Indians, who had lived in almost total isolation prior to this event. 
The problem has been exacerbated by the development of chloroquine-resistant 
strains of Plasmodium falciparum. In an effort to identify viable alternatives 
to dependence on western medicine for malaria treatment, a survey was carried 
out on the local plant species (wild and cultivated) used for this purpose in 
Roraima. Fieldwork was carried out amongst seven indigenous peoples, as well as 
with the non-indigenous settlers. Over 90 species were collected, many of which 
have been cited as used for treatment of malaria and fevers elsewhere. Knowledge 
of antimalarial plants was found to vary greatly between the communities, and in 
some cases there was evidence of recent experimentation. Initial screening of 
plant extracts has shown a high incidence of significant antimalarial activity 
amongst the species collected.

DOI: 10.1177/00494755970270S108
PMID: 9204719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Ethnopharmacol. 1990 Apr;29(1):59-72. doi: 10.1016/0378-8741(90)90098-e.

Contemporary use of bark for medicine by two Salishan native elders of southeast 
Vancouver Island, Canada.

Turner NJ(1), Hebda RJ.

Author information:
(1)Botany Unit, Royal British Columbia Museum, Victoria, B.C., Canada.

Elders of the Saanich and Cowichan Coast Salish people of southern Vancouver 
Island treat, or have treated in the recent past, many ailments with bark 
preparations. Interviews with two elder Salishan women revealed that: 
respiratory ailments were treated with bark of Abies grandis, Arbutus menziesii, 
Cornus nuttallii, Prunus emarginata, Pseudotsuga menziesii and Quercus garryana; 
digestive tract ailments with the bark of Abies grandis, Alnus rubra, Arbutus 
menziesii, Malus fusca. Oemleria cerasiformis, Populus tremuloides, Pseudotsuga 
menziesii, Rhamnus purshianus and Rubus spectabilis; gynaecological problems 
with bark of Abies grandis, Arbutus menziesii, Populus tremuloides, Prunus 
emarginata, Pseudotsuga menziesii and Sambucus racemosa; and dermatological 
complaints with the bark of Mahonia spp., Rubus spectabilis, and Symphoricarpos 
albus. Tree barks have also been used to treat fevers, diabetes, kidney 
problems, sore eyes, and haemorrhaging, and also as general tonics. Two recipes 
for general-purpose multi-bark medicines are provided. In most cases, infusions 
or decoctions of barks are used. The medicines are drunk or applied externally 
as a wash.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-8741(90)90098-e
PMID: 2345461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Rev Neurol. 1996 Jul;24(131):848-54.

[A transcultural view of neurological and mental pathology in a Tzeltal Maya 
community of the Altos Chiapas].

[Article in Spanish]

Carod FJ(1), Vázquez-Cabrera C.

Author information:
(1)Psicóloga Clinica Médicus Mundi-Zaragoza, San Cristobal de las Casas. 
Chiapas, México.

OBJECTIVES: This anthropological study forms part of field-work undertaken in 
Mahosik, a Tzeltal Maya community of 250 inhabitants in the Altos de Chiapas, to 
obtain insight into the neurological and psychosomatic pathology in an ethnic 
and cultural setting different to ours.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Accompanied by a Tzeltal translator we interviewed various 
witch-doctors and faith healers of the Tzeltal Maya tribe to find out their 
ideas about neurological and mental diseases and the treatments used.
RESULTS: Headache or "k'ux jolol' is the fourth most common cause of 
consultation after acute respiratory and gastrointestinal disorders and fevers. 
To relieve it, the boiled leaves of the bush "payté' ("Tagetes neisonii') are 
used as a medicinal bath. Migraine, "yaxti-wanjol chawaj' is treated with the 
raw, crushed roots of the herbs "chopak pox' and "bakte pox' together with the 
practice of cutting the patient with a piece of glass in the temporal region, 
deep enough to make him bleed. Epilepsy or "tub tub ikal' is caused by an abuse 
suffered by the animal spirit which accompanies the individual, after a fight 
between the animal-companions or spirits which serve the forces of Good and 
Evil. The person with chronic crises is considered a witch. Depression or 
"melotan' is fairly common. This is treated with camomile tea containing an 
orange and a lime leaf. "Xiwel' or fear is one of the commonest psychosomatic 
disorders. The faith-healer has to return the lost spirit to its owner in a 
ceremony involving prayer, alcohol and the sacrifice of a fowl. Psychosis or 
"jowijel' may be due to alcohol, dog bite or witch craft and has no cure. 
Madness "chawaj' is caused by bewitchment during a nightmare. It is treated with 
the sap of "viborana' mixed with wild beans.

PMID: 8681201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]