Drug leads from the Kallawaya herbalists of Bolivia. 1. Background, rationale, 
protocol and anti-HIV activity.

Abdel-Malek S(1), Bastien JW, Mahler WF, Jia Q, Reinecke MG, Robinson WE Jr, Shu 
Y, Zalles-Asin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Texas Christian University (TCU), Fort Worth 76129, 
USA.

Aqueous, organic and alcoholic extracts of over 100 samples of 60 species of 
Kallawaya medicinal herbs representing 30 plant families were assayed to compare 
their toxicity and ability to protect MT-2 T-lymphoblastoid cells from the 
cytopathic effect of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The results are 
reported as a therapeutic index (TI) which was > 25 for eighteen species, 
including seven > 50 and one > 100. The anti-HIV activity resided primarily in 
the aqueous rather than in the organic extracts and was concentrated in plants 
used in ethnomedicine to treat lung and liver diseases.

PIP: Plants are a rich source of anti-viral substances. The National Cancer 
Institute therefore annually screens about 1500 species from Africa, Southeast 
Asia, and South and Central America, but not Bolivia, for anti-HIV activity. 
Several unique compounds with anti-HIV activity have emerged from the program. 
The Kallawaya Indians of Bolivia follow a medical tradition from the Tiahuanaco 
(400-1145), Mollo (1145-1435), Inca (1438-1532), Spanish (1532-1825), and 
Bolivian Republic (from 1825) which is only recently starting to be reported. 
They use approximately 900 of the more than 2000 medicinal plants found across 
Bolivia. Aqueous, organic, and alcoholic extracts of more than 100 samples of 60 
species of Kallawaya medicinal herbs representing 30 plant families were assayed 
to compare their toxicity and ability to protect MT-2 T-lymphoblastoid cells 
from the cytopathic effects of HIV. The therapeutic index (TI) of sampled 
species is defined as the ratio of anti-HIV activity to toxic concentration. A 
TI of greater than 25 was chosen as the prerequisite for future 
bioassay-directed isolation of the active components as leads for potential new 
anti-HIV drugs. TI was greater than 25 for 18 species, including seven greater 
than 50 and one greater than 100. The anti-HIV activity resided mainly in the 
aqueous extracts and was concentrated in plants used in ethnomedicine to treat 
lung and liver diseases