Zika virus (ZIKV) is an emerging mosquito-borne virus of medical concern. ZIKV 
infection may represent a serious disease, causing neonatal microcephaly and 
neurological disorders. Nowadays, there is no approved antiviral against ZIKV. 
Several indigenous or endemic medicinal plants from Mascarene archipelago in 
Indian Ocean have been found able to inhibit ZIKV infection. The purpose of our 
study was to determine whether essential oil (EO) from Reunion Island medicinal 
plant Ayapana triplinervis, whose thymohydroquinone dimethyl ether (THQ) is the 
main component has the potential to prevent ZIKV infection in human cells. 
Virological assays were performed on human epithelial A549 cells infected with 
either GFP reporter ZIKV or epidemic viral strain. Zebrafish assay was employed 
to evaluate the acute toxicity of THQ in vivo. We showed that both EO and THQ 
inhibit ZIKV infection in human cells with IC50 values of 38 and 45 µg/mL, 
respectively. At the noncytotoxic concentrations, EO and THQ reduced virus 
progeny production by 3-log. Time-of-drug-addition assays revealed that THQ 
could act as viral entry inhibitor. At the antiviral effective concentration, 
THQ injection in zebrafish does not lead to any signs of stress and does not 
impact fish survival, demonstrating the absence of acute toxicity for THQ. From 
our data, we propose that THQ is a new potent antiviral phytocompound against 
ZIKV, supporting the potential use of medicinal plants from Reunion Island as a 
source of natural and safe antiviral substances against medically important 
mosquito-borne viruses.