Availability of essential elements in nutrient supplements used as antidiabetic 
herbal formulations.

Choudhury RP(1), Reddy AV, Garg AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 247 667, 
India.

Five brands of antidiabetic herbal formulations as tablets, Diabetex, Divya 
Madhu Nashini, Jambrushila, Diabeticin, and Madhumeh Nashini, from different 
pharmacies were analyzed for six minor (Na, K, Ca, Cl, Mg, and P) and 20 trace 
(As, Ba, Br, Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Cu, Fe, Hg, La, Mn, Rb, Sb, Sc, Se, Sm, Th, V, and 
Zn) elements by thermal neutron irradiation followed by high-resolution gamma 
ray spectrometry. Further Ni, Cd, and Pb were determined by atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry. Most elements vary in a narrow range by a factor of 2-4 while 
a few others vary in a wide range, e.g., Na (0.05-0.67 mg/g), Mn (26.7-250 
microg/g), and V (0.26-2.50 microg/g). All the five brands contain K, Cl, Mg, P, 
and Ca as minor constituents along with mean trace amounts of Cr (2.11 +/- 0.67 
microg/g), Cu (15.7 +/- 7.11 microg/g), Fe (459 +/- 171 microg/g), Mn (143 +/- 
23 microg/g), Se (238 +/- 112 ng/g), and V (0.99 +/- 0.93 microg/g). Jambrushila 
is enriched in Na, Ca, Mg, Cl, Fe, Cu, Se, and Zn, essential nutrients 
responsible for curing diabetes. Dietary intake of Mn, Fe, and Cu are greater 
than 10% of the recommended dietary allowance, whereas that for Zn and Se is 
less than 2%. Mean contents of toxic elements (As, Cd, Hg, and Pb) were found 
below permissible limits except in Jambrushila. Cr and Zn were inversely 
correlated with r = -0.81, whereas Rb and Cs exhibit linear correlation (r = 
0.93) in five brands. C, H, N analysis showed C approximately 55%, H 
approximately 12%, and N approximately 2% with a total of approximately 70% 
organic matter. However, thermal decomposition studies at 700 degrees C suggest 
less than 5% nonvolatile metal oxides. Herbal formulations contain minor and 
trace elements in bioavailable forms that favorably influence glucose tolerance 
and possibly increase the body's ability to ameliorate development of diabetes.
