The antimicrobial screening of a Barbadian medicinal plant with indications for 
use in the treatment of diabetic wound infections.

Carrington S(1), Cohall DH, Gossell-Williams M, Lindo JF.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medical Sciences, The University of the West Indies, Cave Hill, 
Barbados.

OBJECTIVE: Diabetes mellitus is a chronic non-communicable disease with high 
prevalence in the North American and Caribbean region. Diabetic Foot Syndrome 
which is an associated complication can lead to the development of wounds and 
ulcers which can become infected. Justicia secunda, a plant known locally in 
Barbados as Bloodroot used in folklore for wound healing, was selected to test 
its ability to aid diabetic wound healing by antimicrobial activity. It was 
therefore tested against the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 25923, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853, and Enterococcus feacalis (clincal strain) 
which are commonly found in diabetic wounds.
METHODS: The plant was collected by local users. Methanol and acetone extracts 
of the plant were prepared with use of soxhlet extraction. The antimicrobial 
activity was assessed with the use of a modified Kirby-Baurer method. 
Concentrations of 200 mg/ml, 100 mg/ml, 10 mg/ml, and 1 mg/ml of the extract 
were used, with a standard ciprofloxacin 5 microg positive control, and a 5% 
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution negative control.
RESULTS: The J secunda methanol and acetone extracts with an extraction yield of 
15.3% and 0.75%, respectively yielded no activity within the concentration range 
against the three strains of bacteria tested. In comparison with the positive 
control, relative inhibition zone diameter (RIZD) values of 0% resulted for both 
the negative control and the extracts, with the positive control having a value 
of 100%.
CONCLUSION: The in vitro screen of the extracts prepared from J secunda, yielded 
no antimicrobial activity against the three strains of bacteria tested and 
therefore does not support the folklore claims by this mechanism of action.
