1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2019 Apr 24;234:245-289. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.01.012. Epub 
2019 Jan 15.

Medicinal plants brought by Indian indentured immigrants: A comparative review 
of ethnopharmacological uses between Mauritius and India.

Mahomoodally MF, Protab K, Aumeeruddy MZ.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Mauritius is famous for its floricultural 
diversity and traditions practiced across the island by various ethnic groups. 
During the British rule in the 1835s, Indian indentured labourers migrated to 
Mauritius and played a very important role in shaping the Mauritian culture. 
They brought along their high heritage of traditional knowledge of certain 
medicinal herbs and spices. Nonetheless, there has been no comparative study to 
investigate whether these past traditional knowledge are still preserved in 
Mauritius and India.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To document and compare the traditional uses of medicinal 
herbs and spices brought by Indian indentured labourers with their current uses 
in Mauritius and India, and to review pharmacological studies of such plants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Locally published textbooks, research dissertations, and 
relevant records from the 'Mauritiana' section of the University of Mauritius 
library were scrutinised for possible early records of such herbs and spices 
brought by Indian indentured immigrants. Field trips and site visits to 
Mauritius Herbarium and The National Folk Museum were conducted to gather data 
on their traditional uses as practiced by the Indian indentured immigrants. A 
literature search was performed to gather the current ethnomedicinal uses of 
these plants in Mauritius and India using key databases such as ScienceDirect 
and PubMed, as well as thesis from local university website. Pharmacological 
studies on these plants were also reviewed in an attempt to compare the 
ethnomedicinal uses against reported ailments.
RESULTS: Indian labourers brought 18 medicinal plants for medicinal purposes as 
documented at the folk museum of Indian Immigration. Piper betle L., Azadirachta 
indica A. Juss., and Curcuma longa L. were common plants used by Indian 
indentured immigrants against a wide range of ailments. Data obtained from 
recent ethnomedicinal surveys revealed that A. indica and C. longa were the most 
traditionally used plants in India, while in Mauritius, C. longa was the most 
popular plant followed by Allium sativum L. and Ocimum tenuiflorum L. It was 
also found that all these plants are currently being used against a wide range 
of diseases in both countries. In addition, several studies have highlighted the 
pharmacological properties such as analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial, 
anti-pyretic, and anti-diabetic for some plants.
CONCLUSION: This investigation can be considered as a first attempt to document 
and compare traditional knowledge of medicinal plants brought by Indian 
immigrants. We observed that some of these knowledge are preserved and still 
practiced in Mauritius. It is anticipated that this study will revive the 
interest in safeguarding and promoting the ancestral knowledge on the uses of 
such plants.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.01.012
PMID: 30658182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2011 Mar;4(3):241-7. doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(11)60078-3. 
Epub 2011 Apr 12.

Coconut (Cocos nucifera L.: Arecaceae): in health promotion and disease 
prevention.

DebMandal M(1), Mandal S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, KPC Medical College and Hospital, 
Jadavpur, Kolkata-700 032, India.

Coconut, Cocos nucifera L., is a tree that is cultivated for its multiple 
utilities, mainly for its nutritional and medicinal values. The various products 
of coconut include tender coconut water, copra, coconut oil, raw kernel, coconut 
cake, coconut toddy, coconut shell and wood based products, coconut leaves, coir 
pith etc. Its all parts are used in someway or another in the daily life of the 
people in the traditional coconut growing areas. It is the unique source of 
various natural products for the development of medicines against various 
diseases and also for the development of industrial products. The parts of its 
fruit like coconut kernel and tender coconut water have numerous medicinal 
properties such as antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antiparasitic, 
antidermatophytic, antioxidant, hypoglycemic, hepatoprotective, immunostimulant. 
Coconut water and coconut kernel contain microminerals and nutrients, which are 
essential to human health, and hence coconut is used as food by the peoples in 
the globe, mainly in the tropical countries. The coconut palm is, therefore, 
eulogised as 'Kalpavriksha' (the all giving tree) in Indian classics, and thus 
the current review describes the facts and phenomena related to its use in 
health and disease prevention.

Copyright © 2011 Hainan Medical College. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1995-7645(11)60078-3
PMID: 21771462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Ethnopharmacol. 2019 May 10;235:164-182. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.02.009. Epub 
2019 Feb 6.

Ethnobotany of medicinal plants used by the Zeliangrong ethnic group of Manipur, 
northeast India.

Panmei R(1), Gajurel PR(2), Singh B(1).

Author information:
(1)Forest Systematic & Ethnobiology Laboratory, Department of Forestry, North 
Eastern Regional Institute of Sciences & Technology, Deemed to be University, 
Nirjuli, Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh 791109, India.
(2)Forest Systematic & Ethnobiology Laboratory, Department of Forestry, North 
Eastern Regional Institute of Sciences & Technology, Deemed to be University, 
Nirjuli, Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh 791109, India. Electronic address: 
prg@nerist.ac.in.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The Zeliangrong people with their yearlong 
experiences still depend on the medicinal plants for primary healthcare. Some of 
the medicinal plants used by the community exhibits established pharmacological 
activities which signify the importance of the traditional knowledge of the 
tribes. Besides, many other species traditionally used by the tribes assume to 
have pharmacological potentiality.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The study aimed to identify the medicinally and 
pharmacologically important species with understanding the traditional healing 
practices and to compare medicinal plant knowledge among the informants of the 
three tribes under Zeliangrong group.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Data were collected by interviewing selected 27 herbal 
healers using modified semi-structured questionnaires. Identification and 
documentation of all the species have been made using standard taxonomic 
procedure. Ethnomedicinal uses of all the recorded species was analyzed with 
computation of the use reports for each species and Informant Consensus Factor.
RESULTS: The study recorded 145 medicinal plants used in healing practices by 
the Zeliangrong tribes. Except 2 species, all are Angiospermic plants found 
mostly in wild condition. These medicinal plants are used for treating about 59 
different health ailments categorized under 13 ICPC disease categories. Highest 
ICF (0.75) was found in Digestive disorder with 174 use reports for 44 plant 
species. Besides the established medicinal plants in the Indian System of 
medicine like Acorus calamus, Centella asiatica, Oroxylum indicum and 
Phyllanthus emblica, a number of other species like Ageratum conizoides, 
Blumeopsis flava, Clerodendrum glandulosum, Gynura cusimbua, Hedyotis scandens 
and Paederia foetida also has maximum use reports. Among the species with higher 
use reports, 2 species namely Clerodendrum glandulosum and Paederia foetida are 
exclusively used for the treatment of hypertension, and bone fracture and sprain 
respectively indicating their remarkable medicinal values and acceptability. Out 
of the total 145 species, only 24 are shared by all the three tribes with 11 
species used for similar diseases.
CONCLUSION: The medicinal plants with higher use reports can be evaluated for 
validation of pharmacological activities and their toxicity. The Indigenous 
Knowledge System of Zeliangrong community for herbal remedies may be of immense 
value in pharmacological experimentation particularly for the uses like malaria, 
health tonic, cancer, jaundice, hypertension and diabetes.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.02.009
PMID: 30738117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Dec;72(23):4445-60. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-2012-1. Epub 
2015 Aug 26.

Pharmacologic overview of Withania somnifera, the Indian Ginseng.

Dar NJ(1)(2)(3), Hamid A(2)(3), Ahmad M(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine-CSIR, 
Sanat Nagar, Srinagar, 190005, India.
(2)Cancer Pharmacology Division, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine-CSIR, 
Canal Road, Jammu, 180001, India.
(3)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Indian Institute of 
Integrative Medicine-CSIR, Canal Road, Jammu, 180001, Jammu and Kashmir, India.
(4)Neuropharmacology Laboratory, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine-CSIR, 
Sanat Nagar, Srinagar, 190005, India. mahmad@iiim.res.in.
(5)Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), Indian Institute of 
Integrative Medicine-CSIR, Canal Road, Jammu, 180001, Jammu and Kashmir, India. 
mahmad@iiim.res.in.

Withania somnifera, also called 'Indian ginseng', is an important medicinal 
plant of the Indian subcontinent. It is widely used, singly or in combination, 
with other herbs against many ailments in Indian Systems of Medicine since time 
immemorial. Withania somnifera contains a spectrum of diverse phytochemicals 
enabling it to have a broad range of biological implications. In preclinical 
studies, it has shown anti-microbial, anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor, 
anti-stress, neuroprotective, cardioprotective, and anti-diabetic properties. 
Additionally, it has demonstrated the ability to reduce reactive oxygen species, 
modulate mitochondrial function, regulate apoptosis, and reduce inflammation and 
enhance endothelial function. In view of these pharmacologic properties, W. 
somnifera is a potential drug candidate to treat various clinical conditions, 
particularly related to the nervous system. In this review, we summarize the 
pharmacologic characteristics and discuss the mechanisms of action and potential 
therapeutic applications of the plant and its active constituents.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-015-2012-1
PMID: 26306935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Prod Bioprospect. 2019 Jun;9(3):175-200. doi: 10.1007/s13659-019-0202-5. 
Epub 2019 Apr 9.

Ethnomedicinal Investigation of Medicinal Plants of Chakrata Region 
(Uttarakhand) Used in the Traditional Medicine for Diabetes by Jaunsari Tribe.

Kumar A(1), Aswal S(1), Chauhan A(2), Semwal RB(3), Kumar A(4), Semwal DK(5).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Centre, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Uttarakhand 
Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Uttarakhand 
Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Pt. Lalit Mohan Sharma Government Postgraduate 
College, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand, 249201, India.
(4)Uttarakhand Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India.
(5)Department of Phytochemistry, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Uttarakhand 
Ayurved University, Harrawala, Dehradun, 248001, India. dr_dks.1983@yahoo.co.in.

The Himalayan region is the treasure house of natural wealth, particularly of 
medicinal and aromatic plants. These plants are used by the Indian traditional 
healers for the past many centuries to treat various ailments such as skin 
disorders, asthma, diabetes, snake bite, fever, pain, eye diseases, diarrhoea, 
indigestion, jaundice, burn, wound, liver disorder, CNS disorders and urinary 
tract infection. The indigenous traditional knowledge of medicinal plants and 
therapies of various local communities has been lost due to changes in 
traditional culture and the introduction of modern technologies. Therefore, it 
is essential to explore the traditional knowledge of the indigenous medicinal 
plants mainly in such areas where there is a severe threat to natural vegetation 
owing to human inhabitation. The present study aimed to explore the medicinal 
plants of Chakrata region (Jaunsar-Bawar Hills), Uttarakhand, India used in the 
folk medicine for the management of diabetes by Jaunsari Tribe. In a 
comprehensive field survey, the information about the medicinal plants have been 
mainly collected from the traditional healers and other elderly people belong to 
the tribal community. All the information about the medicinal plants of the 
study area was documented in a field book. Various tools have been used to 
collect the samples for identification purpose and the authentication of the 
plants was done with the help of taxonomists. The literature on these plants was 
also searched from online (PubMed and Scopus) as well as from some textbooks and 
Ayurvedic classical texts. The present survey-based work described a total of 54 
plants belonging to 47 genera and 30 families used in the traditional medicine 
for the management of diabetes in Chakrata region. The information gathered from 
the local community revealed that the plants are effective in diabetes and one 
can use most of them without consulting a practitioner or traditional healer. 
The literature revealed that most of the surveyed plants are already used in the 
preparation of various antidiabetic formulations such as Chandraprabha vati, 
Nishamalaki chunra, Amritamehari churna and Nisakathakadi kashayam along with 
various patent drugs which are frequently prescribed by the Ayurvedic 
practitioners in India. The present study explored the traditional as well as 
scientific knowledge on the antidiabetic plants used by the tribal community. 
The documented information on these plants can be further used by the scientific 
community to develop new drugs/formulations with the help of modern techniques.

DOI: 10.1007/s13659-019-0202-5
PMCID: PMC6538708
PMID: 30968350

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.


6. J Ethnopharmacol. 2017 Feb 2;197:39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.07.064. Epub 
2016 Jul 22.

Contributions of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) in the area of 
Medicinal plants/Traditional medicine.

Tandon N(1), Yadav SS(2).

Author information:
(1)Indian Council of Medical Research, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India. 
Electronic address: tanneeraj@gmail.com.
(2)Indian Council of Medical Research, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Medicinal plants belong to the oldest known 
health care products that have been used by human beings all over the world and 
are major components of the formulations used in indigenous system of medicine 
practiced in many countries. Besides, finding place as health supplements, 
nutraceuticals, cosmetics, herbal tea etc. there has been a global insurgence of 
interest, including India, leading to enormous research/activities in the area 
of medicinal plants.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The article is aimed to provide the effort and initiatives of 
ICMR towards research on medicinal plants and its contributions on consolidation 
of Indian research on medicinal plants that are very relevant and important in 
the national context.
METHODS: The various initiatives undertaken by ICMR on research on traditional 
medicines/medicinal plants in the past are reviewed and documented in this 
article.
RESULTS: The multi-disciplinary, multicentric research initiatives of ICMR have 
resulted in validation of traditional treatment Kshaarasootra (medicated 
Ayurvedic thread) for anal fistula, Vijayasar (heart wood of Pterocarpus 
marsupium Roxb.) for diabetes mellitus, encouraging micro- and macrofilaricidal 
activity of Shakotak (stem bark of Streblus asper Lour.) in experimental studies 
an iridoid glycosides fraction isolated from root/rhizomes of Picrorhiza kurroa 
Royle ex Benth. (designated as Picroliv) for viral hepatitis. Other 
developmental and compilation of research works on Indian medicinal plants have 
resulted in publications of the thirteen volumes of quality standards, 
comprising of 449 Indian medicinal plants; three volumes of 90 phytochemical 
reference standards; fifteen volumes of review monographs on 4167 medicinal 
plant species; and one publication each on perspectives of Indian medicinal 
plants for management of liver disorders, lymphatic filariasis and diabetes 
mellitus (details available at http://www.icmr.nic.in/mpsite).
CONCLUSION: The ICMR efforts assume special significance in the light of 
multifaceted use of medicinal plants, and the need of better drugs and remedies 
for various diseases. Further, the indigenous system of medicine, and the plant 
drugs, could promise to provide both concepts of therapy, as well as therapeutic 
agents in the areas, where modern system of medicines has few answers. The 
developement of quality standards and review monographs also help the 
regulators, pharmacopoeial bodies and drug industry towards generation of 
quality herbal drugs or traditional medicine preparations. These initiatives are 
also in favour of the World Health Organisation advocating herbal medicines as a 
valid alternative system of therapy in the form of phytomedicines or herbal 
drugs or herbal drug preparations or herbal medicinal products.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.07.064
PMID: 27452657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Bioinformation. 2013 Apr 13;9(7):378-80. doi: 10.6026/97320630009378. Print 
2013.

InDiaMed: A Comprehensive Database of Indian Medicinal plants for Diabetes.

Tota K(1), Rayabarapu N, Moosa S, Talla V, Bhyravbhatla B, Rao S.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Department of 
Pharmacology, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India - 500037 ; Authors Equally 
Contributed.

According to International Diabetes Federation (IDF), India has 62.4 million 
people with diabetes and by 2030 it is predicted that the number will rise to 
100 million. Studies claim that there are around 410 experimentally proven 
Indian medicinal plants which have anti-diabetic activity, of which the 
mechanism of action of 109 plants has been elucidated or reported. So, the need 
of the hour is to explore the claims of Indian medicinal flora and open up the 
facets of many Indian plants which are being examined for their beneficial role 
in diabetes. So, we created a database (InDiaMed) of Indian medicinal plants 
that captures their role in anti-diabetic activity. InDiaMed's features include 
chemical, pharmacological, biochemical and geographical information of the 
medicinal plant, scientifically relevant information of the plant, and the 
coherent research done on it in the field of diabetes. The database also 
includes the list of poly-herbal formulations which are used for treatment of 
diabetes in India.
AVAILABILITY: http://www.indiamed.info.

DOI: 10.6026/97320630009378
PMCID: PMC3669792
PMID: 23750084


8. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006 Jun 15;106(1):1-28. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.03.021. Epub 
2006 Apr 3.

Leads from Indian medicinal plants with hypoglycemic potentials.

Mukherjee PK(1), Maiti K, Mukherjee K, Houghton PJ.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacognosy Research Laboratories, Department of Pharmacy, Franklin-Wilkins 
Building, King's College, London, 150 Stamford Street, London SE1 9NH, UK. 
pulokm@gmail.com

Diabetes mellitus is caused due to deficiency in production of insulin by the 
pancreas, or by the ineffectiveness of the insulin produced. It is a global 
problem and number of those affected is increasing day by day. The plants 
provide a potential source of hypoglycemic drugs because many plants and plant 
derived compounds have been used in the treatment of diabetes. Several medicinal 
plants have found potential use as hypoglycemic in the Indian system of 
medicines, including ayurveda. Many Indian plants have been investigated for 
their beneficial use in different types of diabetes and reports occur in 
numerous scientific journals. This article aims to provide a comprehensive 
review on various plant species from Indian biosphere and their constituents, 
which have been shown to display potent hypoglycemic activity. The use of herbs 
as hypoglycemic is a major avenue in Indian perspectives particularly for 
treating diabetes, which require to be explored more effectively as there are so 
many literatures available on these aspects. This paper describes the chemistry, 
activity and usage of the constituents isolated from these plants from India for 
the treatment of diabetes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.03.021
PMID: 16678368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2008;17 Suppl 1:265-8.

Traditional Indian spices and their health significance.

Krishnaswamy K(1).

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Nutrition , Taranaka, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India. 
sri21kk@hotmail.com

India has been recognized all over the world for spices and medicinal plants. 
Both exhibit a wide range of physiological and pharmacological properties. 
Current biomedical efforts are focused on their scientific merits, to provide 
science-based evidence for the traditional uses and to develop either functional 
foods or nutraceuticals. The Indian traditional medical systems use turmeric for 
wound healing, rheumatic disorders, gastrointestinal symptoms, deworming, 
rhinitis and as a cosmetic. Studies in India have explored its 
anti-inflammatory, cholekinetic and anti-oxidant potentials with the recent 
investigations focusing on its preventive effect on precarcinogenic, 
anti-inflammatory and anti atherosclerotic effects in biological systems both 
under in vitro and in vivo conditions in animals and humans. Both turmeric and 
curcumin were found to increase detoxifying enzymes, prevent DNA damage, improve 
DNA repair, decrease mutations and tumour formation and exhibit antioxidative 
potential in animals. Limited clinical studies suggest that turmeric can 
significantly impact excretion of mutagens in urine in smokers and regress 
precancerous palatal lesions. It reduces DNA adducts and micronuclei in oral 
epithelial cells. It prevents formation of nitroso compounds both in vivo and in 
vitro. It delays induced cataract in diabetes and reduces hyperlipidemia in 
obese rats. Recently several molecular targets have been identified for 
therapeutic / preventive effects of turmeric. Fenugreek seeds, a rich source of 
soluble fiber used in Indian cuisine reduces blood glucose and lipids and can be 
used as a food adjuvant in diabetes. Similarly garlic, onions, and ginger have 
been found to modulate favourably the process of carcinogenesis.

PMID: 18296352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:406365. doi: 10.1155/2013/406365. 
Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Use of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for the detection of glycemic 
elements in Indian medicinal plants.

Rai PK(1), Srivastava AK, Sharma B, Dhar P, Mishra AK, Watal G.

Author information:
(1)Department of NMR, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 110029, 
India ; UJ Nanomaterials Science Research Group, University of Johannesburg, 
P.O. Box 17011, Doornfontein, Johannesburg 2028, South Africa.

The demand for interdisciplinary research is increasing in the new millennium to 
help us understand complex problems and find solutions by integrating the 
knowledge from different disciplines. The present review is an excellent example 
of this and shows how unique combination of physics, chemistry, and biological 
techniques can be used for the evaluation of Indian medicinal herbs used for 
treating diabetes mellitus. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) is a 
sensitive optical technique that is widely used for its simplicity and 
versatility. This review presents the most recent application of LIBS for 
detection of glycemic elements in medicinal plants. The characteristics of 
matrices, object analysis, use of laser system, and analytical performances with 
respect to Indian herbs are discussed.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/406365
PMCID: PMC3818838
PMID: 24228060


11. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2007;595:1-75. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-46401-5_1.

Curcumin: the Indian solid gold.

Aggarwal BB(1), Sundaram C, Malani N, Ichikawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. aggarwal@mdanderson.org

Turmeric, derived from the plant Curcuma longa, is a gold-colored spice commonly 
used in the Indian subcontinent, not only for health care but also for the 
preservation of food and as a yellow dye for textiles. Curcumin, which gives the 
yellow color to turmeric, was first isolated almost two centuries ago, and its 
structure as diferuloylmethane was determined in 1910. Since the time of 
Ayurveda (1900 Bc) numerous therapeutic activities have been assigned to 
turmeric for a wide variety of diseases and conditions, including those of the 
skin, pulmonary, and gastrointestinal systems, aches, pains, wounds, sprains, 
and liver disorders. Extensive research within the last half century has proven 
that most of these activities, once associated with turmeric, are due to 
curcumin. Curcumin has been shown to exhibit antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, 
antiviral, antibacterial, antifungal, and anticancer activities and thus has a 
potential against various malignant diseases, diabetes, allergies, arthritis, 
Alzheimer's disease, and other chronic illnesses. These effects are mediated 
through the regulation of various transcription factors, growth factors, 
inflammatory cytokines, protein kinases, and other enzymes. Curcumin exhibits 
activities similar to recently discovered tumor necrosis factor blockers (e.g., 
HUMIRA, REMICADE, and ENBREL), a vascular endothelial cell growth factor blocker 
(e.g., AVASTIN), human epidermal growth factor receptor blockers (e.g., ERBITUX, 
ERLOTINIB, and GEFTINIB), and a HER2 blocker (e.g., HERCEPTIN). Considering the 
recent scientific bandwagon that multitargeted therapy is better than 
monotargeted therapy for most diseases, curcumin can be considered an ideal 
"Spice for Life".

DOI: 10.1007/978-0-387-46401-5_1
PMID: 17569205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biomed Res Int. 2017;2017:5140506. doi: 10.1155/2017/5140506. Epub 2017 Oct 24.

In Vitro Screening of Three Indian Medicinal Plants for Their Phytochemicals, 
Anticholinesterase, Antiglucosidase, Antioxidant, and Neuroprotective Effects.

Penumala M(1), Zinka RB(1), Shaik JB(1), Amooru Gangaiah D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Yogi Vemana University, Kadapa, Andhra Pradesh, 
India.

Cooccurrence of Diabetes Mellitus and Alzheimer's disease in elder people 
prompts scientists to develop multitarget agents that combat causes and symptoms 
of both diseases simultaneously. In line with this modern paradigm and as a 
follow-up to our previous studies, the present study is designed to investigate 
the crude methanolic extracts and subsequent CHCl3, n-BuOH, and H2O fractions of 
Acalypha alnifolia, Pavetta indica, and Ochna obtusata for their inhibitory 
activities towards specific targets involved in AD and DM, namely, 
acetylcholinesterase, butyrylcholinesterase, and α-glucosidase (α-Glc). The 
methanolic extract and its derived chloroform fractions exhibited remarkable 
inhibitory capacities with IC50 values being found at the μg/mL level. Further 
studies on most active chloroform fractions presented a prominent ability to 
scavenge DPPH and ABTS reactive species and highest neuroprotective effect 
against H2O2 induced cell injury. Phytochemical analysis showed a large amount 
of phenolics, flavonoids, and terpenoids in active fractions. In conclusion, A. 
alnifolia, P. indica, and O. obtusata could be promising sources for the 
treatment of AD and DM since these fractions induced significant 
anticholinesterase, antidiabetic, antioxidant, and neuroprotection effects 
attributable to phenolic, flavonoid, and terpenoid contents and encourage 
further studies for development of multifunctional therapeutic agent for AD and 
DM dual therapy.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/5140506
PMCID: PMC5674485
PMID: 29204442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2011 Jan 20;11:5. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-11-5.

Potent α-amylase inhibitory activity of Indian Ayurvedic medicinal plants.

P S(1), Zinjarde SS, Bhargava SY, Kumar AR.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, University of Pune, India.

BACKGROUND: Indian medicinal plants used in the Ayurvedic traditional system to 
treat diabetes are a valuable source of novel anti-diabetic agents. Pancreatic 
α-amylase inhibitors offer an effective strategy to lower the levels of 
post-prandial hyperglycemia via control of starch breakdown. In this study, 
seventeen Indian medicinal plants with known hypoglycemic properties were 
subjected to sequential solvent extraction and tested for α-amylase inhibition, 
in order to assess and evaluate their inhibitory potential on PPA (porcine 
pancreatic α-amylase). Preliminary phytochemical analysis of the lead extracts 
was performed in order to determine the probable constituents.
METHODS: Analysis of the 126 extracts, obtained from 17 plants (Aloe vera (L.) 
Burm.f., Adansonia digitata L., Allium sativum L., Casia fistula L., 
Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don., Cinnamomum verum Persl., Coccinia grandis (L.) 
Voigt., Linum usitatisumum L., Mangifera indica L., Morus alba L., Nerium 
oleander L., Ocimum tenuiflorum L., Piper nigrum L., Terminalia chebula Retz., 
Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers., Trigonella foenum-graceum L., Zingiber 
officinale Rosc.) for PPA inhibition was initially performed qualitatively by 
starch-iodine colour assay. The lead extracts were further quantified with 
respect to PPA inhibition using the chromogenic DNSA (3, 5-dinitrosalicylic 
acid) method. Phytochemical constituents of the extracts exhibiting≥ 50% 
inhibition were analysed qualitatively as well as by GC-MS (Gas 
chromatography-Mass spectrometry).
RESULTS: Of the 126 extracts obtained from 17 plants, 17 extracts exhibited PPA 
inhibitory potential to varying degrees (10%-60.5%) while 4 extracts showed low 
inhibition (< 10%). However, strong porcine pancreatic amylase inhibitory 
activity (> 50%) was obtained with 3 isopropanol extracts. All these 3 extracts 
exhibited concentration dependent inhibition with IC50 values, viz., seeds of 
Linum usitatisumum (540 μgml-1), leaves of Morus alba (1440 μgml-1) and Ocimum 
tenuiflorum (8.9 μgml-1). Acarbose as the standard inhibitor exhibited an IC50 
(half maximal inhibitory concentration)value of 10.2 μgml-1. Phytochemical 
analysis revealed the presence of alkaloids, tannins, cardiac glycosides, 
flavonoids, saponins and steroids with the major phytoconstituents being 
identified by GC-MS.
CONCLUSIONS: This study endorses the use of these plants for further studies to 
determine their potential for type 2 diabetes management. Results suggests that 
extracts of Linum usitatisumum, Morus alba and Ocimum tenuiflorum act 
effectively as PPA inhibitors leading to a reduction in starch hydrolysis and 
hence eventually to lowered glucose levels.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-11-5
PMCID: PMC3037352
PMID: 21251279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Indian J Clin Biochem. 2000 Aug;15(Suppl 1):169-77. doi: 10.1007/BF02867556.

Medicinal plants for treatment of diabetes mellitus.

Shukia R(1), Sharma SB, Puri D, Prabhu KM, Murthy PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College of Medical Sciences and GTB 
Hospital, Shahdara, 110095 Delhi.

Many plants have been used for the treatment of diabetes mellitus in Indian 
system of medicine and in other ancient systems of the world. Out of these only 
a few have been evaluated as per modern system of medicine. From many such 
plants only extracts have been prepared and their usefulness evaluated in 
experimental diabetes in animals. In some plants likeAllium cepa, Allium 
sativum, Ficus bengalensis, Gymnema sylvestre, Pterocarpus marsupium etc. active 
hypoglycemic principles have been isolated and their mechanism of action 
studied. Most of them seem to act directly on pancreas (pancreatic effect) and 
stimulate insulin level in blood. Some have extra pancreatic effect also by 
acting directly on tissues like liver, muscle etc. and alter favourably the 
activities of the regulatory enzymes of glycolysis, gluconeogenesis and other 
pathways. Since the plant products have less side effects, they have the 
potential as good hypoglycemic drugs. They may also provide clues for the 
development of new and better oral drugs for diabetes.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02867556
PMCID: PMC3454085
PMID: 23105280


15. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2007 May;40(3):163-73. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.40.163.

Indian herbs and herbal drugs used for the treatment of diabetes.

Modak M(1), Dixit P, Londhe J, Ghaskadbi S, Devasagayam TP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Pune, Pune 411007, India.

Traditional Medicines derived from medicinal plants are used by about 60% of the 
world's population. This review focuses on Indian Herbal drugs and plants used 
in the treatment of diabetes, especially in India. Diabetes is an important 
human ailment afflicting many from various walks of life in different countries. 
In India it is proving to be a major health problem, especially in the urban 
areas. Though there are various approaches to reduce the ill effects of diabetes 
and its secondary complications, herbal formulations are preferred due to lesser 
side effects and low cost. A list of medicinal plants with proven antidiabetic 
and related beneficial effects and of herbal drugs used in treatment of diabetes 
is compiled. These include, Allium sativum, Eugenia jambolana, Momordica 
charantia Ocimum sanctum, Phyllanthus amarus, Pterocarpus marsupium, Tinospora 
cordifolia, Trigonella foenum graecum and Withania somnifera. One of the 
etiologic factors implicated in the development of diabetes and its 
complications is the damage induced by free radicals and hence an antidiabetic 
compound with antioxidant properties would be more beneficial. Therefore 
information on antioxidant effects of these medicinal plants is also included.

DOI: 10.3164/jcbn.40.163
PMCID: PMC2275761
PMID: 18398493


16. Chin J Nat Med. 2014 May;12(5):335-44. doi: 10.1016/S1875-5364(14)60041-8.

Indigenous plant medicines for health care: treatment of Diabetes mellitus and 
hyperlipidemia.

Parikh NH(1), Parikh PK(2), Kothari C(3).

Author information:
(1)Arihant School of Pharmacy and Bio-Research Institute, Adalaj, Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat, India. Electronic address: parikhnisha83@gmail.com.
(2)Arihant School of Pharmacy and Bio-Research Institute, Adalaj, Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat, India.
(3)Institute of Pharmacy, Nirma University, Gujarat, India.

Medicinal plants have played an important role in treating and preventing a 
variety of diseases throughout the world. Metabolic syndrome had become a global 
epidemic, defined as a cluster of three of five criteria: insulin resistance and 
glucose intolerance, abdominal obesity, hypertension, low high-density 
cholesterol, and hypertriglyceridemia. The current review focuses on Indian 
medicinal plant drugs and plants used in the treatment of diabetes and 
hyperlipidemia. Though there are various approaches to reduce the ill-effects of 
diabetes and hyperlipidemia and its secondary complications, plant-based drugs 
are preferred due to lesser side effects and low cost. The current review 
focuses on twenty-three medicinal plants used in the treatment of Diabetes 
mellitus and nine medicinal plants used in the treatment of hyperlipidemia. The 
wealth of knowledge on medicinal plants points to a great potential for research 
and the discovery of new drugs to fight diseases, including diabetes and 
hyperlipidemia.

Copyright © 2014 China Pharmaceutical University. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1875-5364(14)60041-8
PMID: 24856756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2008 Nov;4(4):291-308. doi: 10.2174/157339908786241124.

A target based therapeutic approach towards diabetes mellitus using medicinal 
plants.

Prabhakar PK(1), Doble M.

Author information:
(1)Bhupat and Jyoti Mehta School of Biosciences, Department of Biotechnology, 
Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is not one disease but is a heterogonous group of 
syndromes. Contrary to the popular belief DM is a metabolic disorder 
characterized by increased blood glucose level (hyperglycemia) and this is 
because of insufficient or inefficient insulin secretary response. Glucose is 
the main energy source for the body, and in the case of DM, management of 
glucose becomes irregular. There are around 410 experimentally proven medicinal 
plants having antidiabetic properties but the complete mechanism of action is 
available only for about 109. There are several medicinal plants whose extract 
modulate glycolysis, Krebs cycle, gluconeogenesis, HMP shunt pathway, glycogen 
synthesis and their degradation, cholesterol synthesis, metabolism and 
absorption of carbohydrates, and synthesis and release of insulin. This paper 
provides a comprehensive review of the mode of action of medicinal plants that 
exhibit anti-diabetic properties.

DOI: 10.2174/157339908786241124
PMID: 18991598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2007 Oct 27;5(1):1-17.

An overview of Indian novel traditional medicinal plants with anti-diabetic 
potentials.

Gupta R(1), Bajpai KG, Johri S, Saxena AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Lucknow, Lucknow-226007, Uttar Pradesh, 
India. rahulguptalu2007@rediffmail.com

Diabetes mellitus is a global metabolic epidemic affecting essential biochemical 
activities in almost every age group. Indian literatures like Ayurveda have 
already mentioned herbal remediation for a number of human ailments. Among 
Indian traditional medicinal plants several potential anti-diabetic plants and 
herbs are being used as part of our diet since prehistoric time. India has a 
long list of native medicinal plants with confirmed blood sugar lowering 
property. Some of these have proved remarkable for cure of diabetes and its 
complications. The current paper is aimed at providing a review on clinical and 
experimental studies carried out on the most effective and commonly used 
hypoglycemic plants and herbs species from traditional Indian flora. This 
write-up includes hypoglycemic and anti-hyperglycemic activities of plants, 
active hypoglycemic compounds and constituents along with their available 
toxicity status.

PMCID: PMC2816594
PMID: 20162049


19. J Altern Complement Med. 2004 Apr;10(2):369-78. doi: 10.1089/107555304323062365.

Role of selected Indian plants in management of type 2 diabetes: a review.

Saxena A(1), Vikram NK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India. abhasaxena2000@yahoo.com

Comment in
    J Altern Complement Med. 2004 Apr;10(2):223-5.

Type 2 diabetes has become a global epidemic. Modern medicines, despite offering 
a variety of effective treatment options, can have several adverse effects. 
Ayurveda, a science that uses herbal medicines extensively, originated in India. 
Of considerable interest is the adoption of Ayurveda by the mainstream medical 
system in some European countries (e.g., Hungary), emphasizing this modality is 
increasing worldwide recognition. From ancient times, some of these herbal 
preparations have been used in the treatment of diabetes. This paper reviews the 
accumulated literature for 10 Indian herbs that have antidiabetic activity and 
that have been scientifically tested. Few of these herbs, such as Momordica 
charantia, Pterocarpus marsupium, and Trigonella foenum greacum, have been 
reported to be beneficial for treating type 2 diabetes. Mechanisms such as the 
stimulating or regenerating effect on beta cells or extrapancreatic effects are 
proposed for the hypoglycemic action of these herbs.

DOI: 10.1089/107555304323062365
PMID: 15165418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Inflamm Allergy Drug Targets. 2013 Dec;12(6):378-84. doi: 
10.2174/1871528112666131125110017.

Anti-Inflammatory, gastrointestinal and hepatoprotective effects of Ocimum 
sanctum Linn: an ancient remedy with new application.

Kamyab AA, Eshraghian A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Namazi Hospital, P.O. Box: 71345-1744, 
Shiraz, Iran. Eshraghiana@yahoo.com.

Herbal medicine has a long background equal to history of humankind. Several 
plants have been used as remedies in ancient Persian, Egyptian, Chinese and 
Indian civilizations. The plant Ocimum sanctum Linn. (Tulsi) is one of these 
medicinal plants with a wide variety of applications in traditional medicine. In 
modern era, it has been shown to be effective against diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension, cancers, bronchitis, and found to have anti-microbial properties. 
Several experimental studies have confirmed its anti-inflammatory properties and 
its role in modulation of both cellular and humeral immunity. Recently its 
efficacy against inflammatory response, hepatic injury and gastric ulcer has 
been elucidated in animal studies. In liver, essential oils and extracts of 
Ocimum sanctum could prevent oxidative stress by increasing glutathione 
peroxidae and catalase and were also effective in prevention of hepatic 
steatosis. In gastric epithelial tissue different derivatives of Ocimum sanctum 
had anti-ulcer and anti-secretory characteristics and could heal gastric 
ulceration. These beneficial properties of this medicinal plant can mainly 
originate from its major biochemically active constituents like eugenol, 
carvacrol, ursolic acid, β-caryophyllene and rosmarinic acid. Here in, we 
reviewed current literature about anti-inflammatory, gastric and 
hepatoprotective properties of Ocimum sanctum.

DOI: 10.2174/1871528112666131125110017
PMID: 24266685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Ethnopharmacol. 2020 Jan 30;247:112264. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.112264. Epub 
2019 Oct 7.

Reduction of blood glucose by plant extracts and their use in the treatment of 
diabetes mellitus; discrepancies in effectiveness between animal and human 
studies.

Furman BL(1), Candasamy M(2), Bhattamisra SK(3), Veettil SK(4).

Author information:
(1)Strathclyde Institute of Pharmacy & Biomedical Sciences, 161, Cathedral 
Street Glasgow, G4 ORE, Scotland, UK. Electronic address: 
b.l.furman@strath.ac.uk.
(2)School of Pharmacy, International Medical University, Jalan Jalil Perkasa 19, 
Bukit Jalil, 57000, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Electronic address: 
MayurenCandasamy@imu.edu.my.
(3)School of Pharmacy, International Medical University, Jalan Jalil Perkasa 19, 
Bukit Jalil, 57000, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Electronic address: 
SubratKumar@imu.edu.my.
(4)School of Pharmacy, International Medical University, Jalan Jalil Perkasa 19, 
Bukit Jalil, 57000, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Electronic address: 
sajesh_kalkandi@imu.edu.my.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The global problem of diabetes, together with 
the limited access of large numbers of patients to conventional antidiabetic 
medicines, continues to drive the search for new agents. Ancient Asian systems 
such as traditional Chinese medicine, Japanese Kampo medicine, and Indian 
Ayurvedic medicine, as well as African traditional medicine and many others have 
identified numerous plants reported anecdotally to treat diabetes; there are 
probably more than 800 such plants for which there is scientific evidence for 
their activity, mostly from studies using various models of diabetes in 
experimental animals.
AIM OF THE REVIEW: Rather than a comprehensive coverage of the literature, this 
article aims to identify discrepancies between findings in animal and human 
studies, and to highlight some of the problems in developing plant extract-based 
medicines that lower blood glucose in patients with diabetes, as well as to 
suggest potential ways forward.
METHODS: In addition to searching the 2018 PubMed literature using the terms 
'extract AND blood glucose, a search of the whole literature was conducted using 
the terms 'plant extracts' AND 'blood glucose' AND 'diabetes' AND 'double blind' 
with 'clinical trials' as a filter. A third search using PubMed and Medline was 
undertaken for systematic reviews and meta-analyses investigating the effects of 
plant extracts on blood glucose/glycosylated haemoglobin in patients with 
relevant metabolic pathologies.
FINDINGS: Despite numerous animal studies demonstrating the effects of plant 
extracts on blood glucose, few randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trials have been conducted to confirm efficacy in treating humans with diabetes; 
there have been only a small number of systematic reviews with meta-analyses of 
clinical studies. Qualitative and quantitative discrepancies between animal and 
human clinical studies in some cases were marked; the factors contributing to 
this included variations in the products among different studies, the doses 
used, differences between animal models and the human disease, and the impact of 
concomitant therapy in patients, as well as differences in the duration of 
treatment, and the fact that treatment in animals may begin before or very soon 
after the induction of diabetes.
CONCLUSION: The potential afforded by natural products has not yet been realised 
in the context of treating diabetes mellitus. A systematic, coordinated, 
international effort is required to achieve the goal of providing anti-diabetic 
treatments derived from medicinal plants.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.112264
PMID: 31600561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Indian J Exp Biol. 2010 Mar;48(3):294-8.

Antihyperglycemic activity of compounds isolated from Indian medicinal plants.

Akanksha(1), Srivastava AK, Maurya R.

Author information:
(1)Medicinal and Process Chemistry Division, Central Drug Research Institute, 
CSIR, Lucknow 226 001, India.

Eleven antidiabetic Indian medicinal plants were investigated in streptozotocin 
induced diabetic rat model and provided scientific validation to prove their 
antihyperglycemic activity. Antidiabetic principles from five plants were 
isolated. All the compounds isolated were evaluated for antihyperglycemic 
activity in streptozotocin induced diabetic rat model and activities were 
compared with standard drug metformin. Some compounds were also screened in 
db/db mice. Two compounds (PP-1 and PP-2) inhibited significantly the activity 
of PTPase-1B in an in vitro system. This might be the underlying mechanism of 
antihyperglycemic activity of these compounds.

PMID: 21046984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2017 Jul;125(7):441-448. doi: 
10.1055/s-0043-103458. Epub 2017 Apr 13.

Fenugreek, A Potent Hypoglycaemic Herb Can Cause Central Hypothyroidism Via 
Leptin - A Threat To Diabetes Phytotherapy.

Majumdar J(1), Chakraborty P(1), Mitra A(2), Sarkar NK(3), Sarkar S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, City College, 102/1 Raja Rammohan Sarani, Kolkata, 
Affiliated to University of Calcutta, West Bengal, India.
(2)School of Medical Science & Technology, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Kharagpur, Kharagpur, West Bengal, India.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Presidency University, Kolkata, West 
Bengal, India.

Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum graecum), a medicinal herb with potent 
antihyperglycaemic and hypoglycaemic effects, is used to treat diabetes. This 
study is aimed to explore the interaction of fenugreek seed extract (FSE) and 
HPT (hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid) axis in context of leptin secretion which 
have important role in normal and type-1 diabetic subjects. FSE (confirmed to 
contain trigonelline, diosgenin, 4 hydroxyisoleucine) was gavaged (0.25 gm/kg 
body weight/day) to normal and alloxan-induced type-1 diabetic rats for 4 weeks. 
Expression of hypothalamic prepro-TRH (Thyrotropin releasing hormone) mRNA, 
serum levels of TRH, TSH (Thyroid stimulating hormone), fT3, fT4, insulin, 
leptin, glucose; thyroperoxidase activity and growth of thyroid gland, food 
intake, adiposity index were also studied FSE significantly down regulated 
prepro-TRH mRNA expression; decreased serum TRH, TSH, fT3, fT4 levels, and 
regressed thyroid gland in FSE-fed normal and diabetic rats than those observed 
in normal diet-fed control and diabetic rats. FSE decreased (p<0.005-0.001) 
adiposity index and leptin secretion, increased food intake and body weight in 
all FSE-fed rats. FSE improved insulin secretion, decreased glucose level but 
impaired HPT axis in diabetic rats, indicating insulin-independent central 
hypothyroidism. Results suggested that the dominant signal to hypothalamus 
suppressing HPT axis is the fall in leptin level which i resulted from decreased 
adiposity index following FSE feeding. Fenugreek simultaneously having 
hypoglycaemic and hypothyroidal actions raises questions whether it can be 
safely used to treat diabetes and/or hyperthyroidism as was suggested by many 
workers.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-103458
PMID: 28407664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have no 
conflict of interest to disclose.


24. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed. 2018 Jun 28;14(1):45. doi: 10.1186/s13002-018-0240-9.

A study on food-medicine continuum among the non-institutionally trained siddha 
practitioners of Tiruvallur district, Tamil Nadu, India.

Esakkimuthu S(1), Sylvester Darvin S(1), Mutheeswaran S(1), Gabriel Paulraj 
M(1), Pandikumar P(2), Ignacimuthu S(3)(4), Al-Dhabi NA(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Ethnopharmacology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600034, India.
(2)Division of Ethnopharmacology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600034, India. pkr_eri@hotmail.com.
(3)Division of Ethnopharmacology, Entomology Research Institute, Loyola College, 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 600034, India. eriloyola@hotmail.com.
(4)International Scientific Partnership Programme, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
11451, Saudi Arabia. eriloyola@hotmail.com.
(5)Addiriyah Chair for Environmental Studies, College of Science, King Saud 
University, 2455, Riyadh, 11451, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Medicinal properties of the food species are one of the poorly 
documented and important areas of ethnopharmacology. The present survey 
quantitatively documented the medicinal foods prescribed by the 
non-institutionally trained siddha practitioners of Tiruvallur district of Tamil 
Nadu.
METHODS: Field work was carried out between December 2014 and April 2017 using a 
questionnaire. The illnesses mentioned by the informants were grouped as illness 
categories on the basis of emic perceptions. Sufficiency of sampling of this 
survey was assessed by plotting the cumulative number of UR and Shannon-Wiener's 
index. The indices such as informant consensus factor (FIC), Index of Agreement 
on Remedies (IAR), and Cultural Food Significance Index (CFSI) were calculated.
RESULTS: This study documented 165 medicinal foods used by 82 
non-institutionally trained siddha practitioners of Tiruvallur district, and 
73.93% of these preparations were plant based. Among the animal taxa, 82.05% 
were represented by fish taxa. The illness category gastrointestinal ailments is 
the majorly cited illness category treated with plant-based formulations. The 
illness categories viz., gastrointestinal ailments, hemorrhoids, and neural 
ailments had high consensus under the group of plant-based medicinal foods. In 
animal-based medicinal foods, kapha ailments had gained 23.07% of UR. The 
illness categories such as bone fractures, male reproductive ailments, blood 
ailments, and anabolic had high FIC values.
CONCLUSIONS: Deeper studies on different dietary cultures of India may help to 
derive better interpretations on food-medicine continuum. This study identified 
some important claims such as the use of citron, pomegranate and Solanum 
americanum (gastrointestinal ailments), Abutilon indicum, onions and elephant 
foot yam (hemorrhoids), Boerhavia diffusa (urinary ailments), Moringa oleifera 
(anemia), Aloe vera (gynecological ailments), Eclipta prostrata (liver 
ailments), ivy gourd (diabetes), citron (hypertension), Centella asiatica 
(psychological ailments), spade nose shark (lactogogue), reticulate whipray 
(wheezing and bronchitis), Katelysia opima (impotence), Indian squid (anemia), 
and Indian oil sardine (anabolic). More studies on these claims will help 
identify novel functional foods to add to the field of medical nutrition 
therapy, with traditional brand identity. Robust studies on the documentation of 
the traditional knowledge on marine resources will yield a good database for 
various stakeholders and policy makers.

DOI: 10.1186/s13002-018-0240-9
PMCID: PMC6025710
PMID: 29954417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study is approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee for Ethnobiological 
Research (sanction number ERI/IEEC/2014/01). Written informant consent was 
obtained from all informants who were willing to participate. CONSENT FOR 
PUBLICATION: Consent for publication was obtained from the informants. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


25. Inflammopharmacology. 2015 Oct;23(5):203-29. doi: 10.1007/s10787-015-0246-z. 
Epub 2015 Jul 31.

The medicinal properties and phytochemistry of plants of the genus Terminalia 
(Combretaceae).

Cock IE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Biomolecular and Physical Sciences, Nathan Campus, Griffith University, 170 
Kessels Rd, Nathan, Brisbane, QLD, 4111, Australia. I.Cock@griffith.edu.au.
(2)Environmental Futures Centre, Nathan Campus, Griffith University, 170 Kessels 
Rd, Nathan, Brisbane, QLD, 4111, Australia. I.Cock@griffith.edu.au.

Plants of the genus Terminalia are amongst the most widely used plants for 
traditional medicinal purposes worldwide. Many species are used for their 
antibacterial, antifungal, antiprotozoal, antiviral, antidiarrhoeal, analgesic, 
antimalarial, antioxidant, antiinflammatory and anticancer activities. Wound 
healing and cardiovascular effects have also been credited to some species. Many 
Terminalia species have multiple beneficial effects for multiple diseases and 
ailments. Indeed, the Indian species Terminalia chebula is known as the king of 
plants in Ayurveda due to its broad range of medicinal uses. However, apart from 
the reported ethnopharmacological uses of many Terminalia species, surprisingly 
few studies have rigorously examined this important genus for their medical 
properties/mechanisms and phytochemistry. This is likely due to the high tannin 
content common to many Terminalia species and the perception that these tannins 
may be responsible for much of their beneficial properties. As the complexities 
of tannins make them poor candidates for drug design, most interest in 
Terminalia species has been for their pharmacognostic and nutraceutical value 
and they have often been overlooked as potentials for drug discovery. However, 
recent reports have identified many other interesting phytochemicals and 
demonstrated that these may be responsible for several of the reported 
bioactivities of the Terminalia species used in traditional medicinal systems. 
The last decade has seen a large increase in the number of studies into the use 
of Terminalia species as therapeutic agents. Several species used in Ayurvedic 
medicine (Terminalia arjuna, Terminalia bellerica, Terminalia catappa, T. 
chebula) in particular have received much recent attention. Similarly, recent 
reports have also highlighted the medicinal potential of species from Africa, 
Australia and the Americas. The aim of this report is to summarise the recent 
research into the medicinal properties, phytochemistry and therapeutic 
mechanisms of Terminalia species and thus to highlight and direct future areas 
of research into the medicinal activities of this important genus.

DOI: 10.1007/s10787-015-0246-z
PMID: 26226895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Ethnopharmacol. 2002 Jun;81(1):81-100. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00059-4.

Medicinal plants of India with anti-diabetic potential.

Grover JK(1), Yadav S, Vats V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari 
Nagar, New Delhi-110049, India. jkgrover@hotmail.com

Since ancient times, plants have been an exemplary source of medicine. Ayurveda 
and other Indian literature mention the use of plants in treatment of various 
human ailments. India has about 45000 plant species and among them, several 
thousands have been claimed to possess medicinal properties. Research conducted 
in last few decades on plants mentioned in ancient literature or used 
traditionally for diabetes have shown anti-diabetic property. The present paper 
reviews 45 such plants and their products (active, natural principles and crude 
extracts) that have been mentioned/used in the Indian traditional system of 
medicine and have shown experimental or clinical anti-diabetic activity. Indian 
plants which are most effective and the most commonly studied in relation to 
diabetes and their complications are: Allium cepa, Allium sativum, Aloe vera, 
Cajanus cajan, Coccinia indica, Caesalpinia bonducella, Ficus bengalenesis, 
Gymnema sylvestre, Momordica charantia, Ocimum sanctum, Pterocarpus marsupium, 
Swertia chirayita, Syzigium cumini, Tinospora cordifolia and Trigonella foenum 
graecum. Among these we have evaluated M. charantia, Eugenia jambolana, Mucuna 
pruriens, T. cordifolia, T. foenum graecum, O. sanctum, P. marsupium, Murraya 
koeingii and Brassica juncea. All plants have shown varying degree of 
hypoglycemic and anti-hyperglycemic activity.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00059-4
PMID: 12020931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013 Oct 5;13:257. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-257.

Do plants mediate their anti-diabetic effects through anti-oxidant and 
anti-apoptotic actions? an in vitro assay of 3 Indian medicinal plants.

Kalekar SA(1), Munshi RP, Thatte UM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, TN Medical College and BYL Nair 
Charitable Hospital, Mumbai Central, Mumbai 400 008, India. 
renuka.munshi@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Both experimental and clinical studies suggest that oxidative stress 
plays a major role in the pathogenesis of both types of diabetes mellitus. This 
oxidative stress leads to β-cell destruction by apoptosis. Hence exploring 
agents modulating oxidative stress is an effective strategy in the treatment of 
both Type I and Type II diabetes. Plants are a major source of anti-oxidants and 
exert protective effects against oxidative stress in biological systems. 
Phyllanthus emblica, Curcuma longa and Tinospora cordifolia are three such 
plants widely used in Ayurveda for their anti-hyperglycemic activity. 
Additionally their anti-oxidant properties have been scientifically validated in 
various experimental in vitro and in vivo models. Hence the present in vitro 
study was planned to assess whether the anti-hyperglycemic effects of the 
hydro-alcoholic extracts of Phyllanthus emblica (Pe) and Curcuma longa (Cl) and 
aqueous extract of Tinospora cordifolia (Tc) are mediated through their 
antioxidant and/or anti-apoptotic property in a streptozotocin induced stress 
model.
METHODS: RINm5F cell line was used as a model of pancreatic β-cells against 
stress induced by streptozotocin (2 mM). Non-toxic concentrations of the plant 
extracts were identified using MTT assay. Lipid peroxidation through MDA 
release, modulation of apoptosis and insulin release were the variables measured 
to assess streptozotocin induced damage and protection afforded by the plant 
extracts.
RESULTS: All 3 plants extracts significantly inhibited MDA release from RIN 
cells indicating protective effect against STZ induced oxidative damage. They 
also exhibited a dose dependent anti-apoptotic effect as seen by a decrease in 
the sub G0 population in response to STZ. None of the plant extracts affected 
insulin secretion from the cells to a great extent.
CONCLUSION: The present study thus demonstrated that the protective effect of 
the selected medicinal plants against oxidative stress induced by STZ in vitro, 
which was exerted through their anti-oxidant and anti-apoptotic actions.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-257
PMCID: PMC3852064
PMID: 24093976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Plants (Basel). 2019 Nov 20;8(12):527. doi: 10.3390/plants8120527.

Withaninsams A and B: Phenylpropanoid Esters from the Roots of Indian Ginseng 
(Withania somnifera).

Baek SC(1), Lee S(2), Kim S(1), Jo MS(1), Yu JS(1), Ko YJ(3), Cho YC(2), Kim 
KH(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, National Center for 
Inter-University Research Facilities (NCIRF), Seoul National University, 
Gwanak-gu, Seoul 08826, Korea.

Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal (Solanaceae), known as Indian ginseng or 
ashwagandha, has been used in Indian Ayurveda for the treatment of a variety of 
disorders, such as diabetes and reproductive and nervous system disorders. It is 
particularly used as a general health tonic, analgesic, and sedative. As part of 
continuing projects to discover unique bioactive natural products from medicinal 
plants, phytochemical investigation of the roots of W. somnifera combined with a 
liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS)-based analysis has led to the 
isolation of two novel phenylpropanoid esters, Withaninsams A (1) and B (2), as 
an inseparable mixture, along with three known phenolic compounds (3, 4, and 6) 
and a pyrazole alkaloid (5). The structures of the new compounds were elucidated 
using a combination of spectroscopic methods, including one-dimensional (1D) and 
two-dimensional (2D) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and high-resolution 
electrospray ionization mass spectroscopy (HR-ESIMS). Withaninsams A (1) and B 
(2) are phenylpropanoid esters that contain a side chain, 
4-methyl-1,4-pentanediol unit. To the best of our knowledge, the present study 
is the first to report on phenylpropanoid esters with 4-methyl-1,4-pentanediol 
unit. The anti-inflammatory activity of the isolated compounds (1-6) was 
evaluated by determining their inhibitory effects on nitric oxide (NO) 
production in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated RAW 264.7 macrophages, where 
compound 3 inhibited LPS-induced NO production (IC50 = 33.3 μM) and TNF-α 
production, a pro-inflammatory cytokine (IC50 = 40.9 μM). The anti-inflammatory 
mechanism through the inhibition of transcriptional iNOS protein expression was 
confirmed by western blotting experiments for the active compound 3, which 
showed decreased iNOS protein expression.

DOI: 10.3390/plants8120527
PMCID: PMC6963882
PMID: 31757014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


29. Molecules. 2019 Sep 23;24(19):3447. doi: 10.3390/molecules24193447.

Ayapana triplinervis Essential Oil and Its Main Component Thymohydroquinone 
Dimethyl Ether Inhibit Zika Virus at Doses Devoid of Toxicity in Zebrafish.

Haddad JG(1), Picard M(2), Bénard S(3), Desvignes C(4), Desprès P(5), Diotel 
N(6), El Kalamouni C(7).

Author information:
(1)Université de la Réunion, INSERM U1187, CNRS UMR 9192, IRD UMR 249, Unité 
Mixte Processus Infectieux en Milieu Insulaire Tropical, Plateforme 
Technologique CYROI, 94791 Sainte Clotilde, La Réunion, France. 
juliano.haddad@univ-reunion.fr.
(2)Université de la Réunion, INSERM U1187, CNRS UMR 9192, IRD UMR 249, Unité 
Mixte Processus Infectieux en Milieu Insulaire Tropical, Plateforme 
Technologique CYROI, 94791 Sainte Clotilde, La Réunion, France. 
picard.morgane.noelie@gmail.com.
(3)Plateforme de recherche CYROI, 2 rue Maxime Rivière, 97490 Sainte Clotilde, 
La Réunion, France. s.benard@cyroi.fr.
(4)SAS REUNION ECOEX, 2 rue Maxime rivière, 97490 Sainte Clotilde, La Réunion, 
France. claire.desvignes@reunionecoex.fr.
(5)Université de la Réunion, INSERM U1187, CNRS UMR 9192, IRD UMR 249, Unité 
Mixte Processus Infectieux en Milieu Insulaire Tropical, Plateforme 
Technologique CYROI, 94791 Sainte Clotilde, La Réunion, France. 
philippe.despres@univ-reunion.fr.
(6)Université de La Réunion, INSERM, UMR 1188 Diabète athérothrombose Thérapies 
Réunion Océan Indien (DéTROI), 97490 Saint-Denis, de La Réunion, France. 
nicolas.diotel@univ-reunion.fr.
(7)Université de la Réunion, INSERM U1187, CNRS UMR 9192, IRD UMR 249, Unité 
Mixte Processus Infectieux en Milieu Insulaire Tropical, Plateforme 
Technologique CYROI, 94791 Sainte Clotilde, La Réunion, France. 
chaker.el-kalamouni@univ-reunion.fr.

Zika virus (ZIKV) is an emerging mosquito-borne virus of medical concern. ZIKV 
infection may represent a serious disease, causing neonatal microcephaly and 
neurological disorders. Nowadays, there is no approved antiviral against ZIKV. 
Several indigenous or endemic medicinal plants from Mascarene archipelago in 
Indian Ocean have been found able to inhibit ZIKV infection. The purpose of our 
study was to determine whether essential oil (EO) from Reunion Island medicinal 
plant Ayapana triplinervis, whose thymohydroquinone dimethyl ether (THQ) is the 
main component has the potential to prevent ZIKV infection in human cells. 
Virological assays were performed on human epithelial A549 cells infected with 
either GFP reporter ZIKV or epidemic viral strain. Zebrafish assay was employed 
to evaluate the acute toxicity of THQ in vivo. We showed that both EO and THQ 
inhibit ZIKV infection in human cells with IC50 values of 38 and 45 µg/mL, 
respectively. At the noncytotoxic concentrations, EO and THQ reduced virus 
progeny production by 3-log. Time-of-drug-addition assays revealed that THQ 
could act as viral entry inhibitor. At the antiviral effective concentration, 
THQ injection in zebrafish does not lead to any signs of stress and does not 
impact fish survival, demonstrating the absence of acute toxicity for THQ. From 
our data, we propose that THQ is a new potent antiviral phytocompound against 
ZIKV, supporting the potential use of medicinal plants from Reunion Island as a 
source of natural and safe antiviral substances against medically important 
mosquito-borne viruses.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24193447
PMCID: PMC6804133
PMID: 31547527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.


30. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:9232593. doi: 
10.1155/2016/9232593. Epub 2016 Aug 28.

Genus Tinospora: Ethnopharmacology, Phytochemistry, and Pharmacology.

Chi S(1), She G(1), Han D(1), Wang W(2), Liu Z(2), Liu B(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chinese Pharmacy, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 
100102, China.
(2)National Institute of Metrology, Beijing 100013, China.

The genus Tinospora includes 34 species, in which several herbs were used as 
traditional medicines by indigenous groups throughout the tropical and 
subtropical parts of Asia, Africa, and Australia. The extensive literature 
survey revealed Tinospora species to be a group of important medicinal plants 
used for the ethnomedical treatment of colds, headaches, pharyngitis, fever, 
diarrhea, oral ulcer, diabetes, digestive disorder, and rheumatoid arthritis. 
Indian ethnopharmacological data points to the therapeutic potential of the T. 
cordifolia for the treatment of diabetic conditions. While Tinospora species are 
confusing in individual ingredients and their mechanisms of action, the 
ethnopharmacological history of those plants indicated that they exhibit 
antidiabetic, antioxidation, antitumor, anti-inflammation, antimicrobial, 
antiosteoporosis, and immunostimulation activities. While the clinical 
applications in modern medicine are lacking convincing evidence and support, 
this review is aimed at summarizing the current knowledge of the traditional 
uses, phytochemistry, biological activities, and toxicities of the genus 
Tinospora to reveal its therapeutic potentials and gaps, offering opportunities 
for future researches.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/9232593
PMCID: PMC5018348
PMID: 27648105


31. Curr Mol Med. 2019;19(1):12-19. doi: 10.2174/1566524019666190219124301.

Impact of Active Antihyperglycemic Components as Herbal Therapy for Preventive 
Health Care Management of Diabetes.

Kashyap H(1), Gupta S(1), Bist R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Banasthali Vidyapith, Rajasthan, 
304022, India.

Diabetes is a metabolic hyperglycemic condition that progressively develops, 
effect small and large sensory fibers in the affected population. It has various 
complications as hypertension, coronary artery disease, stroke, blindness, 
kidney disease as well as peripheral neuropathy. Sulfonylureas, 
thiazolidinediones, metformin, biguanidine, acarbose and insulin are commonly 
used drugs for diabetic patients, but these all have certain side effects. Even 
metformin, that is known as the miracle drug for diabetes has been found to be 
associated with side effects, as during treatment it involves complications with 
eyes, kidneys, peripheral nerves, heart and vasculature. In the present article, 
we hypothesize recent discoveries with respect to active ingredients from Indian 
medicinal plants i.e., polypeptide-p (protein analogue act as artificial 
insulin), charantin (a steroidal saponin), momordicin (an alkaloid) and osmotin 
(ubiquitous plant protein and animal analogue of human adeponectin) possessing 
anti-hyperglycemic potential for diabetes type II. Therefore, plants as herbal 
therapy have preventive care of hyperglycemia accompanied with healthy lifestyle 
which can provide significant decline in the incidences of diabetes in future.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1566524019666190219124301
PMID: 30806316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Bioorg Chem. 2017 Feb;70:267-283. doi: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2016.12.004. Epub 2016 
Dec 26.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B inhibitors as antidiabetic agents - A brief 
review.

Verma M(1), Gupta SJ(2), Chaudhary A(3), Garg VK(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Meerut Institute of Engineering & 
Technology, Baghpat By-pass Crossing, NH-58, Delhi-Haridwar Highway, Meerut 
250005, India. Electronic address: mansi7184@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Chemical Biology (CSIR), 4, Raja 
S.C. Mullick Road, Jadavpur, Kolkata 700032, W.B., India.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Meerut Institute of Engineering & 
Technology, Baghpat By-pass Crossing, NH-58, Delhi-Haridwar Highway, Meerut 
250005, India.

Diabetes mellitus and obesity are one of the most common health issues spread 
throughout world and raised the medical attention to find the new effective 
agents to treat these disease state. Occurrence of the drug resistance to the 
insulin and leptin receptor is also challenging major issues. The molecules that 
can overcome this resistance problem could be effective for the treatment of 
both type II diabetes and obesity. Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase (PTP) has 
emerged as new promising targets for therapeutic purpose in recent years. 
Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase 1B (PTP 1B) act as a negative regulator of insulin 
and leptin receptor signalling pathways. Several approaches have been 
successfully applied to find out potent and selective inhibitors. This article 
reviews PTP 1B inhibitors; natural, synthetic and semi-synthetic that showed 
inhibition towards enzyme as a major target for the management of type II 
diabetes. These studies could be contributing the future development of PTP 1B 
inhibitors as drugs.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2016.12.004
PMID: 28043717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Indian J Pharmacol. 2018 May-Jun;50(3):130-138. doi: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_77_18.

Phytochemical screening, antioxidant, antityrosinase, and antigenotoxic 
potential of Amaranthus viridis extract.

Kumari S(1), Elancheran R(2), Devi R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Life Sciences, Biochemistry Laboratory, Institute of Advanced 
Study in Science and Technology, Guwahati, Assam, India.
(2)Division of Life Sciences, Drug Discovery Laboratory, Institute of Advanced 
Study in Science and Technology, Guwahati, Assam, India.

OBJECTIVE: Amaranthus viridis (Amaranthaceae) widely distributed all over the 
world, growing under a wide range of climatic conditions and has been utilized 
as a medicinal herb in traditional Ayurvedic medicine as antipyretic agents, 
also for the treatment of inflammation, ulcer, diabetic, asthma and 
hyperlipidemia. The aim of the study was designed to evaluate the chemical 
composition and antioxidant and biological properties of different fractions 
obtained from A. viridis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four different extracts of A. viridis were prepared using 
aqueous, methanol, chloroform, and hexane and investigated their antioxidant 
potential using free radical scavenging activities such as 
2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), 
2,2'-azinobis-3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid (ABTS), and nitric oxide 
(NO) radical scavenging activity, as well as metal chelating activity. In 
addition, antityrosinase and antigenotoxicity properties were also evaluated by 
the standard in vitro methods. Finally, the active methanolic extract (ME) was 
investigated for identifying the phenolic compounds using UPLC-MS/MS.
RESULTS: In the present study, chlorogenic acid, gulonic acid, and kaempferol 
were found to be the major components responsible for the antioxidant activity 
of A. viridis extract as evidenced from UPLC-MS/MS. Furthermore, the ME of A. 
viridis revealed excellent antioxidant activities such as DPPH radical 
scavenging activity (IC50= 47.23 ± 0.66 μg/mL), NO radical scavenging activity 
(IC50= 64.33 ± 2.01 μg/mL), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) radical scavenging activity 
(IC50= 33.21 ± 3.3 μg/mL), ABTS radical scavenging activity (IC50= 47.61 ± 1.31 
μg/mL), metal chelating activity (IC50= 32.1 ± 1.11 μg/mL), as well as lipid 
peroxidation inhibiting activity (IC50= 112 ± 1.21 μg/mL). Furthermore, ME 
revealed that the protective effects of extract were observed on H2O2-induced 
DNA damages with alkaline comet assay.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the study concluded that the promising antioxidant 
capacities of A. viridis extract can further be utilized in various 
agricultural, pharmaceutical, and food applications.

DOI: 10.4103/ijp.IJP_77_18
PMCID: PMC6106121
PMID: 30166750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


34. Biomed Pharmacother. 2018 Jan;97:375-384. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.133. 
Epub 2017 Nov 6.

In vitro and in vivo immunomodulatory potential of Pedicularis longiflora and 
Allium carolinianum in alloxan-induced diabetes in rats.

Yatoo MI(1), Dimri U(2), Gopalakrishnan A(3), Saxena A(4), Wani SA(5), Dhama 
K(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Veterinary Clinical Services Complex, Faculty of Veterinary 
Sciences and Animal Husbandry, Shuhama, Srinagar, 190006, Jammu and Kashmir, 
India. Electronic address: iqbalyatoo@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Medicine, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, 
Bareilly, 243122, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, Madras Veterinary College, Tamil 
Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Tamil Nadu, 600005, India.
(4)Division of Molecular Bioprospection, CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, 226015, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(5)Division of Livestock Products Technology, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences and 
Animal Husbandry, Shuhama, Srinagar, 190006, Jammu and Kashmir, India.
(6)Division of Pathology, ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, 
Bareilly-243122, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Pedicularis longiflora Rudolph (Orobanchaceae) and Allium carolinianum Linn 
(Alliaceae) are two important medicinal plants found in trans-Himalayan 
Changthang. The immunomodulatory potential of these plants has not been 
explored. In the present study, we evaluated the in vitro and in vivo 
immunomodulatory potential of P. longiflora and A. carolinianum in 
alloxan-induced diabetes in Wistar rats. The ethanol extracts of the aerial 
parts of P. longiflora and whole plant parts of A. carolinianum were used for 
studying the in vitro immunomodulatory activity using lymphocyte stimulation and 
cytokine release assays. For the in vivo study, 5 groups of 6 rats per group, 
including alloxan-induced diabetic and plant extract-treated rats, were 
evaluated for cell-mediated immune (CMI) and humoral immune (HMI) responses in a 
42-day experimental trial using doses of 500mg/kg b.wt. for P. longiflora and 
250mg/kgbwt. for A. carolinianum. For P. longiflora, the median effective dose 
was found to be 500mg/kg. The in vitro lymphocyte stimulation index for P. 
longiflora was significantly higher (1.73±0.04, p<0.05) than that for A. 
carolinianum (1.27±0.06). However, the release of transforming growth factor-β1 
(TGF-β1, 15.63±1.00, p<0.05) by P. longiflora was significantly lower than that 
by A. carolinianum (21.61±1.19), suggesting a better immune response by P. 
longiflora than by A. carolinianum. P. longiflora significantly increased the 
ear thickness (53.12%), inflammatory cellular infiltration (200.00±11.42), and 
total leukocyte count (7.44±0.02) compared to A. carolinianum (47.57%, 
165.83±3.96, and 7.01±0.01, respectively). P. longiflora significantly reduced 
the percentage of leukocytes with depolarized mitochondria (3.24±0.16%) and 
apoptosis (1.81±0.07%), and induced a better CMI response than A. carolinianum. 
Significantly (p<0.05) higher hemagglutination titer (28.37±0.80) and IgG 
production (6.43±0.34mg/mL) were observed in the P. longiflora-treated group 
than in the A. carolinianum-treated group (23.93±0.58 and 6.23±0.37mg/mL). 
Plasma tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and TGF-β1 levels, and nuclear factor-κB 
(NF-κB) expression were significantly (p<0.05) lower in the P. 
longiflora-treated group than in the A. carolinianum-treated group. This may be 
due to better HMI responses produced by P. longiflora than by A. carolinianum. 
This is the first study to show that P. longiflora ethanol extract has more 
potent in vitro and in vivo immunomodulatory activities than A. carolinianum, 
especially in alloxan-induced diabetic rats. However, further research is needed 
to identify the different molecular mechanisms involved in mediating this 
immunomodulatory response.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2017.10.133
PMID: 29091887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Indian J Pharm Sci. 2009 Sep;71(5):594-8. doi: 10.4103/0250-474X.58175.

Effect of alcoholic extracts of Indian medicinal plants on the altered enzymatic 
activities of diabetic rats.

Sundaram EN(1), Reddy PU, Singh KP.

Author information:
(1)Drug Standardisation Unit (H), O. U. B. No. 32, Street No. 4, Vikrampuri, 
Habsiguda, Hyderabad-500 007, India.

In present study, the effect of alcoholic extract of Momordica charantia, Aegle 
marmelos and Eugenia jambolana was studied on serum glutamic oxaloacetate 
transminase and serum glutamic pyruvate transminase activities and on serum 
urea, total protein and albumin concentrations of streptozotocin diabetic rats. 
Diabetes in rats was induced by single dose of streptozotocin (30 mg/kg i. p.). 
On confirming the diabetes after 48 h of injection, alcoholic extracts of three 
plants were administered orally in doses of 250 mg and 500 mg/kg/d for 30 d. 
Glibenclamide (300 mug/kg/d) was used as a reference drug for comparison. 
Streptozotocin diabetic rats showed a significant increase in serum glutamic 
oxaloacetate transminase and serum glutamic pyruvate transminase activities and 
serum urea concentration but a significant decrease in serum total protein and 
albumin concentrations and albumin/globulin ratio. Oral administration of 
alcoholic extract of Momordica charantia, Aegle marmelos and Eugenia jambolana 
in daily doses of 250 mg and 500 mg/kg for a period of 1 mo produced dose- and 
duration-dependent decrease in serum glutamic oxaloacetate transminase and serum 
glutamic pyruvate transminase activities as well as decrease in serum urea 
concentration and restored the serum total protein and albumin concentration and 
albumin/globulin ratio to a great extent in streptozotocin diabetic rats. The 
beneficial effects of these plants in 500 mg/kg dose in streptozotocin diabetic 
rats were comparable to that of glibenclamide (300 mug/kg), a standard oral 
hypoglycaemic drug used in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.4103/0250-474X.58175
PMCID: PMC2866361
PMID: 20502588


36. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2011 Jan;4(1):20-3. doi: 10.1016/S1995-7645(11)60025-4. 
Epub 2011 Jan 15.

Evaluation of antidiabetic and related actions of some Indian medicinal plants 
in diabetic rats.

Patil RN(1), Patil RY, Ahirwar B, Ahirwar D.

Author information:
(1)CEC School of Pharmacy, Lal Khadan, Masturi Road, Bilaspur (CG) India. 
patilrn31@rediffmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate antidiabetic activity of chloroform extracts of Acacia 
arabica bark, Benincasa hispida fruit, Tinispora cordifolia stem, Ocimum sanctum 
areal parts and Jatropha curcus leaves.
METHODS: The chloroform extracts of Acacia arabica bark, Benincasa hispida 
fruit, Tinospora cordifolia stem, aerial part of Ocimum sanctum and Jatropha 
curcus leaves were evaluated at different doses (250 and 500 mg/kg body weight.) 
for antidiabetic potentials in alloxan induced diabetic albino rats. The 
extracts were administered for two weeks in different groups whereas tolbutamide 
(80 mg/kg body weight) was used as reference standard throughout study.
RESULTS: The result of present study showed test compounds significantly 
decreases elevated level of serum glucose and also caused to reverse the 
cholesterol, triglyceride, HDL and LDL values when compared to untreated 
diabetic rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Our finding indicates that different test extracts were able to 
ameliorate the derangements in lipid metabolism caused by diabetes mellitus in 
alloxan induced diabetic rats towards normal level.

Copyright © 2011 Hainan Medical College. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1995-7645(11)60025-4
PMID: 21771409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 2018;12(1):5-6. doi: 
10.2174/1872213X1201180821095512.

Advances in Developing Prophylactics and Therapeutics to Counter Inflammatory, 
Allergic and Infectious Diseases.

Munjal A(1), Iqbal HMN(2), Dhama K(3).

Author information:
(1)Barkatullah University Bhopal-462026 Madhya Pradesh, India.
(2)Tecnologico de Monterrey School of Engineering and Sciences Campus Monterrey 
Ave. Eugenio Garza Sada 2501 Monterrey, N. L., CP 64849, Mexico.
(3)ICAR-Indian Veterinary Research Institute Izatnagar-243 122, Bareilly Uttar 
Pradesh, India.

Comment on
    Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 2018;12(1):7-23.
    Recent Pat Inflamm Allergy Drug Discov. 2018;12(1):59-68.

DOI: 10.2174/1872213X1201180821095512
PMID: 30152277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2019 May;32(3):1111-1119.

Report: Pharmacognostic and physicochemical screening of Euphorbia nivulia 
Buch.-Ham.

Younus M(1), Hasan MM(1), Rehman MS(2), Abbas K(3), Sarwar G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, The Islamia University of Bahawalpur, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Baha ud Din Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Botany, Faculty of Sciences, The Islamia University of 
Bahawalpur, Pakistan.

Euphorbia nivulia Buch.-Ham. (Euphorbiaceae) is commonly known as Indian Spurge 
Tree in English, and "Saj Thor" or "Jhanami booti" in local language. The plant 
is used traditionally in the treatment of various diseases like inflammation, 
fever, worm infection, asthma, cough, wounds and diabetes. In current study 
fresh as well as dried aerial parts of the plant and cut sections were examined, 
both macroscopically and microscopically. The study also deals with fluorescence 
analysis and phytochemical characteristics and other WHO recommended methods for 
standardization. WHO guidelines on quality control for medicinal plants 
materials were used for pharmacognostical evaluation of E. nivulia, 
phytochemical screening helps in determining the predominant classes of active 
constituents responsible for the activity. The present work will be helpful in 
identification of the fresh and dried samples of aerial parts 
pharmacognostically and anatomically. These studies will serve as a reference 
for correct identification and may be helpful in checking any type of 
adulteration. These observations will also help in differentiating this species 
from closely related species of the same genus and family.

PMID: 31278728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Nat Med. 2016 Jan;70(1):115-9. doi: 10.1007/s11418-015-0932-6. Epub 2015 Aug 
13.

A simple and effective method for vegetative propagation of an endangered 
medicinal plant Salacia oblonga Wall.

Deepak KG(1), Suneetha G(1), Surekha Ch(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Bioinformatics, Institute of Science, GITAM 
University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, 530 045, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry & Bioinformatics, Institute of Science, GITAM 
University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, 530 045, India. 
challa_surekha@yahoo.co.in.

Salacia oblonga Wall. is an endangered medicinal plant whose conservation is 
urgently needed, as it is extensively used in the Indian Ayurvedic system of 
medicine to treat diabetes mellitus. This study shows an easy, effective and 
simple method of conserving genetic identity and producing elite clones of S. 
oblonga through vegetative propagation. Vegetative propagation was achieved 
using roots (R), stems with leaves (SL) and stems without leaves (S) with 
different concentrations (0-500 ppm) of indole butyric acid (IBA). Explants S 
and SL showed maximum shooting response with 300 ppm IBA and explant R showed 
maximum response with 200 ppm IBA.

DOI: 10.1007/s11418-015-0932-6
PMID: 26267809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2012 Jun 19;12:77. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-12-77.

Enzyme inhibitory and antioxidant activities of traditional medicinal plants: 
potential application in the management of hyperglycemia.

Gulati V(1), Harding IH, Palombo EA.

Author information:
(1)Environment and Biotechnology Centre, Faculty of Life and Social Sciences, 
Swinburne University of Technology, PO Box 218, Hawthorn 3122 VIC, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Traditional Indian and Australian medicinal plant extracts were 
investigated to determine their therapeutic potential to inhibit key enzymes in 
carbohydrate metabolism, which has relevance to the management of hyperglycemia 
and type 2 diabetes. The antioxidant activities were also assessed.
METHODS: The evaluation of enzyme inhibitory activity of seven Australian 
aboriginal medicinal plants and five Indian Ayurvedic plants was carried out 
against α-amylase and α-glucosidase. Antioxidant activity was determined by 
measuring (i) the scavenging effect of plant extracts against 2, 
2-diphenyl-1-picryl hydrazyl (DPPH) and 2, 
2'-azinobis-3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonate (ABTS) and (ii) ferric reducing 
power. Total phenolic and total flavonoid contents were also determined.
RESULTS: Of the twelve plant extracts evaluated, the highest inhibitory activity 
against both α-amylase and α-glucosidase enzymes was exerted by Santalum 
spicatum and Pterocarpus marsupium with IC50 values of 5.43 μg/ml and 0.9 μg/ml, 
respectively, and 5.16 μg/ml and 1.06 μg/ml, respectively. However, the extracts 
of Acacia ligulata (IC50 = 1.01 μg/ml), Beyeria leshnaultii (0.39 μg/ml), Mucuna 
pruriens (0.8 μg/ml) and Boerhaavia diffusa (1.72 μg/ml) exhibited considerable 
activity against α-glucosidase enzyme only. The free radical scavenging activity 
was found to be prominent in extracts of Acacia kempeana, Acacia ligulata 
followed by Euphorbia drummondii against both DPPH and ABTS. The reducing power 
was more pronounced in Euphorbia drummondii and Pterocarpus marsupium extracts. 
The phenolic and flavonoid contents ranged from 0.42 to 30.27 μg/mg equivalent 
of gallic acid and 0.51 to 32.94 μg/mg equivalent of quercetin, respectively, in 
all plant extracts. Pearson's correlation coefficient between total flavonoids 
and total phenolics was 0.796.
CONCLUSION: The results obtained in this study showed that most of the plant 
extracts have good potential for the management of hyperglycemia, diabetes and 
the related condition of oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-12-77
PMCID: PMC3502323
PMID: 22713130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Ethnopharmacol. 2002 Oct;82(2-3):197-205. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00180-0.

Antioxidant activity in medicinal plants associated with the symptoms of 
diabetes mellitus used by the indigenous peoples of the North American boreal 
forest.

McCune LM(1), Johns T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Science, Macdonald Campus, McGill University, 
Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue, Quebec, Canada. letitiamccune@msn.com

Thirty-five plant species were selected from the published literature as 
traditionally used by the Indigenous Peoples of the boreal forest in Canada for 
three or more symptoms of diabetes or its complications. Antioxidant activities 
in methanolic extracts support the contribution of these traditional medicines 
in a lifestyle historically low in the incidence of diabetes. In a DPPH assay of 
free radical scavenging activity 89% of the methanol extracts had activity 
significantly greater than common modern dietary components, 14% were 
statistically equal to ascorbic acid and 23% had activities similar to green tea 
and a Trolox positive control. Superoxides produced with an NBT/xanthine oxidase 
assay found scavenging was significantly higher in 29% of the species as 
compared with the modern dietary components and Trolox. The methanol extracts of 
Rhus hirta, Quercus alba and Cornus stolonifera performed similarly to green 
tea's in this assay. Assessment of peroxyl radical scavenging using a DCF/AAPH 
assay showed 60% of the plant extracts statistically similar to Trolox while R. 
hirta and Solidago canadensis extracts were greater than green tea, ascorbic 
acid and Trolox. The majority of the species (63 and 97%, respectively) had 
scavenging activities similar to ascorbic acid in the superoxide and peroxyl 
radical scavenging assays.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00180-0
PMID: 12241996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Phytomedicine. 2019 Aug;61:152831. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2019.152831. Epub 2019 
Jan 10.

Dry leaf extracts of Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers attenuate oxidative 
stress and inflammatory condition in human monocytic (THP-1) cells.

Reddi KK(1), Tetali SD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of 
Hyderabad, CUC, Prof. CR Rao Rd, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Telangana State 500046, 
India; Department of Bioscience Research, College of Dentistry, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of 
Hyderabad, CUC, Prof. CR Rao Rd, Gachibowli, Hyderabad, Telangana State 500046, 
India. Electronic address: stetali@uohyd.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Miers is known for its therapeutic 
value in Indian traditional medicine for treating diabetes, rheumatoid 
arthritis, jaundice and cardiac diseases. However, information regarding its 
protective role against inflammatory diseases at the molecular level is limited.
PURPOSE: The objective of the present work is to study the antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory effect of alcoholic and water extracts of T. cordifolia 
(Willd.) Miers leaves in activated human monocytic THP-1 cells.
STUDY DESIGN/METHODS: Phytochemical analyses of the dry leaf extracts of T. 
cordifolia (Willd.) Miers prepared using the solvents alcohol (TCAE) or water 
(TCWE) are performed employing spectrophotometric methods for estimating total 
phenolic and flavonoid content, and the plant material was authenticated by 
detecting T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers metabolite biomarkers using LC-MS/MS. 
Arachidonic acid (AA)- and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated human monocytic 
(THP-1) cells were used as experimental models to investigate the antioxidant 
and anti-inflammatory activities of the plant extracts. Arachidonic acid 
(AA)-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) in THP-1 cells were monitored by 
confocal microscopy/spectrofluorimetry and transcript of antioxidant enzyme 
catalase (CAT), by quantitative real time PCR. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced 
proinflammatory marker like TNF-α at transcription and protein levels in THP-1 
cells were measured by quantitative real-time PCR or ELISA respectively. 
Further, the effect of T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers extracts on LPS-induced 
NF-κB translocation, and IκB and P-IκB protein levels, were studied by 
immunoblotting and confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers extracts exhibited significant amounts of 
total phenolic and flavonoid content, and LC-MS/MS analyses detected 
tinosponone, a TC-specific clerodane-derived diterpene. Both types of extracts 
attenuated AA-induced ROS generation via enhancing catalase enzyme activity in 
THP-1 cells. Real time PCR and ELISA experiments revealed that the elevated 
levels of LPS-induced TNF-α was remarkably attenuated in THP-1 cells pretreated 
with T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers extracts. Western blot and confocal microscopy 
showed that the alcoholic extract's anti-inflammatory activity by attenuating 
NF-κB translocation into the nucleus in LPS-activated THP-1 cells via the 
inhibition of IκB degradation in the cytosol.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that T. cordifolia (Willd.) Miers dry leaf 
extracts possess antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties via upregulation 
of antioxidant enzymes and attenuation of NF- κB nuclear translocation in 
activated human monocytic (THP-1) cells, therefore the present study supports 
our proposed molecular basis for the traditional use of T. cordifolia (Willd.) 
Miers for treating various inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2019.152831
PMID: 31035042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Indian J Pharmacol. 2013 Jan-Feb;45(1):30-3. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.106431.

Insulin sensitizing effect of 3 Indian medicinal plants: an in vitro study.

Kalekar SA(1), Munshi RP, Bhalerao SS, Thatte UM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, TN Medical College and BYL Nair 
Charitable Hospital, Mumbai Central, Mumbai - 400 008, India.

OBJECTIVE: Measurement of glucose uptake into peripheral tissue is an important 
mechanism to assess Insulin sensitivity. The present in vitro study was 
conducted to evaluate the Insulin sensitizing activity of Phyllanthus emblica 
(Pe), Tinospora cordifolia (Tc) and Curcuma longa (Cl) by assessing glucose 
uptake activity in a 3T3L1 adipocyte model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The 3T3 L1 fibroblast cells were differentiated to 
adipocytes, using a cocktail of insulin, isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and 
dexamethazone. These adipocytes were initially treated with different 
concentrations of the selected plants following which 2-deoxy glucose uptake was 
estimated using a radioactive assay. The effects of plants on glucose uptake 
both in the presence and absence of insulin was evaluated and compared with 
pioglitazone, a known insulin sensitizer.
RESULTS: Pe and Tc per se significantly stimulated glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 
adipocytes in a dose dependent manner with maximal effect at higher 
concentrations (200 μg/ml). The effect of both Pe and Tc at 200 μg/ml was 
comparable to insulin and greater than pioglitazone. Cl per se stimulated 
glucose uptake with maximal effect at 50 μg/ml. However, this effect was lesser 
as compared to insulin with higher concentrations inhibiting glucose uptake. 
When combined with insulin, an antagonist effect was observed between Pe, Tc and 
insulin indicating a possible plant-drug interaction while Cl in combination 
with insulin showed an increase in the glucose uptake as compared to Cl alone.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that one of the mechanisms for the anti-diabetic 
effect of Pe, Cl and Tc may be through an insulin sensitizing effect 
(stimulation of glucose uptake into adipocytes). Further studies using other 
target sites viz. skeletal muscle and hepatocytes models and in an insulin 
resistant state would help substantiate this conclusion.

DOI: 10.4103/0253-7613.106431
PMCID: PMC3608290
PMID: 23543787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicting Interest: No


44. J Ethnopharmacol. 2003 Jan;84(1):105-8. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00144-7.

Comparative evaluation of hypoglycaemic activity of some Indian medicinal plants 
in alloxan diabetic rats.

Kar A(1), Choudhary BK, Bandyopadhyay NG.

Author information:
(1)Satsang Herbal Research and Analytical Laboratories, PO Satsang-814 116 
Deoghar, India. pratip_neogy@hotmail.com

In our experiments 30 hypoglycaemic medicinal plants (known and less known) have 
been selected for thorough studies from indigenous folk medicines, Ayurvedic, 
Unani and Siddha systems of medicines. In all the experiments with different 
herbal samples (vacuum dried 95% ethanolic extracts), definite blood glucose 
lowering effect within 2 weeks have been confirmed in alloxan diabetic albino 
rats. Blood glucose values are brought down close to normal fasting level using 
herbal samples at a dose of 250 mg/kg once, twice or thrice daily, as needed. 
While evaluating comparative hypoglycaemic activity of the experimental herbal 
samples, significant blood glucose lowering activities are observed in 
decreasing order in the following 24 samples-Coccinia indica, Tragia 
involucrata, G. sylvestre, Pterocarpus marsupium, T. foenum-graecum, Moringa 
oleifera, Eugenia jambolana, Tinospora cordifolia, Swertia chirayita, Momordica 
charantia, Ficus glomerata, Ficus benghalensis, Vinca rosea, Premna 
integrifolia, Mucuna prurita, Terminalia bellirica, Sesbenia aegyptiaca, 
Azadirachta indica, Dendrocalamus hamiltonii, Zingiber officinale, Aegle 
marmelos, Cinnamomum tamala, Trichosanthes cucumerina and Ocimum sanctum. 
Present studies besides confirming hypoglycaemic activities of the experimental 
herbal samples, help identify more potent indigenous hypoglycaemic herbs (in 
crude ethanolic extract) from the comparative study of the reported experimental 
results.

Copyright 2002 Published by Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00144-7
PMID: 12499084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Ethnopharmacol. 2012 Jun 14;141(3):1051-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.04.002. 
Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Adipogenic constituents from the bark of Larix laricina du Roi (K. Koch; 
Pinaceae), an important medicinal plant used traditionally by the Cree of Eeyou 
Istchee (Quebec, Canada) for the treatment of type 2 diabetes symptoms.

Shang N(1), Guerrero-Analco JA, Musallam L, Saleem A, Muhammad A, Walshe-Roussel 
B, Cuerrier A, Arnason JT, Haddad PS.

Author information:
(1)Natural Health Products and Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Department of 
Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC H3T 1J4, 
Canada.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Diabetes is a growing epidemic worldwide, 
especially among indigenous populations. Larix laricina was identified through 
an ethnobotanical survey as a traditional medicine used by Healers and Elders of 
the Cree of Eeyou Istchee of northern Quebec to treat symptoms of diabetes and 
subsequent in vitro screening confirmed its potential.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We used a bioassay-guided fractionation approach to 
isolate the active principles responsible for the adipogenic activity of the 
organic extract (80% EtOH) of the bark of Larix laricina. Post-confluent 3T3-L1 
cells were differentiated in the presence or absence of the crude extract, 
fractions or isolates of Larix laricina for 7 days, then triglycerides content 
was measured using AdipoRed reagent.
RESULTS: We identified a new cycloartane triterpene (compound 1), which strongly 
enhanced adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells with an EC(50) of 7.7 μM. It is 
responsible for two thirds of the activity of the active fraction of Larix 
laricina. The structure of compound 1 was established on the basis of 
spectroscopic methods (IR, HREIMS, 1D and 2D NMR) as 
23-oxo-3α-hydroxycycloart-24-en-26-oic acid. We also identified several known 
compounds, including three labdane-type diterpenes (compounds 2-4), two 
tetrahydrofuran-type lignans (compounds 5-6), three stilbenes (compounds 7-9), 
and taxifolin (compound 10). Compound 2 (13-epitorulosol) also potentiated 
adipogenesis (EC(50) 8.2 μM) and this is the first report of a biological 
activity for this compound.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of putative antidiabetic principles 
isolated from Larix laricina, therefore increasing the interest in medicinal 
plants from the Cree pharmacopeia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.04.002
PMID: 22542642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2006 Dec;33(12):1150-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2006.04507.x.

Biochemical evaluation of antidiabetogenic properties of some commonly used 
Indian plants on streptozotocin-induced diabetes in experimental rats.

Narendhirakannan RT(1), Subramanian S, Kandaswamy M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Madras, Chennai, India.

1. Diabetes mellitus is a serious metabolic disorder with micro- and 
macrovascular complications that results in significant morbidity and mortality. 
2. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the hypoglycaemic efficacy of 
commonly used traditional Indian plants, such as Murraya koenigii, Mentha 
piperitae, Ocimum sanctum and Aegle marmelos, in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced 
experimental rats. 3. Oral administration of the ethanolic extract of these 
plants resulted in a significant decrease in the levels of blood glucose, 
glycosylated haemoglobin and urea, with a concomitant increase in glycogen, 
haemoglobin and protein, in diabetic rats. Treatment with these plant extracts 
also resulted in an increase in insulin and C-peptide levels and glucose 
tolerance. 4. The decreased activities of carbohydrate-metabolising enzymes, 
such as hexokinase, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and glycogen synthase, in 
diabetic rats were significantly elevated towards near normal in rats treated 
with extracts of M. koenigii, O. sanctum and A. marmelos; the increased 
activities of lactate dehydrogenase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, 
glucose-6-phosphatase and glycogen phosphorylase in STZ diabetic rats were 
significantly reduced following treatment with the plant extracts. 5. Elevated 
specific binding of [(125)I]-labelled insulin to the receptor found in diabetic 
rats was markedly decreased in extract-treated groups. However, treatment of 
diabetic rats with M. piperitae did not result in any significant modification 
in all parameters. 6. Phytochemical screening conducted by us revealed the 
presence of biologically active ingredients in the ethanolic extracts of M. 
koenigii, O. sanctum and A. marmelos, which may readily account for the observed 
hypoglycaemic activity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1681.2006.04507.x
PMID: 17184494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Pharmacogn Rev. 2017 Jul-Dec;11(22):167-174. doi: 10.4103/phrev.phrev_17_17.

Psidium guajava: A Single Plant for Multiple Health Problems of Rural Indian 
Population.

Daswani PG(1), Gholkar MS(1), Birdi TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Plants, The Foundation for Medical Research, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.

The rural population in India faces a number of health problems and often has to 
rely on local remedies. Psidium guajava Linn. (guava), a tropical plant which is 
used as food and medicine can be used by rural communities due to its several 
medicinal properties. A literature search was undertaken to gauge the rural 
health scenario in India and compile the available literature on guava so as to 
reflect its usage in the treatment of multiple health conditions prevalent in 
rural communities. Towards this, electronic databases such as Pubmed, Science 
Direct, google scholar were scanned. Information on clinical trials on guava was 
obtained from Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials and 
Clinicaltrial.gov. The literature survey revealed that guava possesses various 
medicinal properties which have been reported from across the globe in the form 
of ethnobotanical/ethnopharmacological surveys, laboratory investigations and 
clinical trials. Besides documenting the safety of guava, the available 
literature shows that guava is efficacious against the following conditions 
which rural communities would encounter. (a) Gastrointestinal infections; (b) 
Malaria; (c)Respiratory infections; (d) Oral/dental infections; (e) Skin 
infections; (f) Diabetes; (g) Cardiovascular/hypertension; (h) Cancer; (i) 
Malnutrition; (j) Women problems; (k) Pain; (l) Fever; (m) Liver problems; (n) 
Kidney problems. In addition, guava can also be useful for treatment of animals 
and explored for its commercial applications. In conclusion, popularization of 
guava, can have multiple applications for rural communities.

DOI: 10.4103/phrev.phrev_17_17
PMCID: PMC5628524
PMID: 28989253

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


48. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Apr 2;181:118-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.036. Epub 
2016 Jan 25.

Traditional uses, phytochemistry and pharmacological properties of Neolamarckia 
cadamba: A review.

Pandey A(1), Negi PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Fruit and Vegetable Technology, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 570020, India; Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
(AcSIR), New Delhi 110001, India.
(2)Fruit and Vegetable Technology, CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 570020, India. Electronic address: psnegi@cftri.res.in.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: There are more than 3000 officially documented 
plants in the Indian subcontinent that hold great medicinal potential. One such 
under-explored plant is an evergreen tropical tree Neolamarckia cadamba (Roxb.) 
Bosser (Rubiaceae). It is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical regions 
of the world and has therapeutic potential against many diseases such as 
diabetes, anaemia, stomatitis, leprosy, cancer and infectious diseases. 
Neolamarckia cadamba has historical existence in India and it is mentioned in 
mythical stories. There are several reports on medicinal values of root, bark 
and leaves of N. cadamba; but the literature on its fruits is scanty. Therefore, 
the present review aims to provide updated comprehensive information on the 
phytochemistry and pharmacological properties of different parts of N. cadamba 
tree with special reference to its fruit, in order to open new perspectives for 
future food and pharmacological research.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature search was performed on N. cadamba using 
ethnobotanical textbooks, published articles in peer-reviewed journals, 
unpublished materials, government survey reports and scientific databases such 
as Pubmed, Scopus, Web of Science, Science Direct, Google Scholar and other web 
search engines (Google, Yahoo). The Plant List, International Plant Name Index 
and Kew Botanical Garden Plant name databases were used to validate the 
scientific names.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Neolamarckia cadamba is one of the economically 
important trees, which is being exploited for paper, pulp and wood industry. In 
folk medicine, various parts of N. cadamba are used in the treatment of various 
ailments such as fever, uterine complaints, blood diseases, skin diseases, 
tumour, anaemia, eye inflammation and diarrhoea. Other reported uses of N. 
cadamba include antihepatotoxic, antimalarial, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, 
antipyretic, diuretic and laxative. Various phytochemicals such as cadambine and 
its derivatives (dihydrocadambine and isodihydrocadambine) and indole alkaloids 
(Neolamarckines) were isolated from the leaves; whereas the presence of quinovic 
acid derivatives have been reported in the bark of N. cadamba.
CONCLUSION: The present review compiles information on an ethnopharmacologically 
useful plant N. cadamba. Bioactive compounds responsible for its various 
medicinal properties and their effects at the molecular level need to be 
investigated in more detail. Furthermore, the detailed study of toxicity and 
pharmacological properties of extracts as well as molecules in N. cadamba is 
required to confirm the ethnomedicinal claims of N. cadamba for food and 
pharmaceutical applications.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.036
PMID: 26821190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Aug 2;189:186-93. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.05.014. Epub 
2016 May 10.

Ethnobotanical uses of neem (Azadirachta indica A.Juss.; Meliaceae) leaves in 
Bali (Indonesia) and the Indian subcontinent in relation with historical 
background and phytochemical properties.

Sujarwo W(1), Keim AP(2), Caneva G(3), Toniolo C(4), Nicoletti M(5).

Author information:
(1)Bali Botanical Gardens, Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI), Candikuning 
Baturiti, Tabanan 82191, Bali, Indonesia; Department of Science, University Roma 
Tre, Viale G. Marconi 446, 00146 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
wawan.sujarwo@lipi.go.id.
(2)Botany Division (Herbarium Bogoriense), Research Center for Biology, 
Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI), Cibinong Science Center, 16911 West 
Java, Indonesia. Electronic address: ary.prihardhyanto@lipi.go.id.
(3)Department of Science, University Roma Tre, Viale G. Marconi 446, 00146 Rome, 
Italy. Electronic address: giulia.caneva@uniroma3.it.
(4)Department of Environmental Biology, La Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale 
Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: chiara.toniolo@uniroma1.it.
(5)Department of Environmental Biology, La Sapienza University of Rome, Piazzale 
Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
marcello.nicoletti@uniroma1.it.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Neem (Azadirachta indica; Meliaceae) is widely 
known for its cold pressed seed oil, mainly used as insecticide, but also for 
cosmetic, medicinal and agricultural uses. The seed oil is widely employed in 
the Indian subcontinent, and the leaves seem to have a lower relevance, but the 
ethnobotanical information of Bali (Indonesia) considers the utilisation of 
leaves for medicinal properties.
AIM OF THE STUDY: We report ethnopharmacological information about current uses 
of neem, in particular of the leaves, besides the insecticidal one, we discuss 
on the historical background of their uses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Ethnobotanical data were collected using both literature 
and scientific references and semi-structured interviews with 50 informants 
(ages ranged between 14 and 76 years old) through the snowball method in 
thirteen aga (indigenous Balinese) villages, following Ethic code procedures. 
The informants were asked to specify: which part of the plant was used, and how 
that plant part was used. Plant specimens were collected, identified and made 
into herbarium voucher. In consideration of the high variability and complex 
chemical constituent of neem, a HPTLC analysis of neem leaves coming from both 
the Indonesian island of Bali and the Indian subcontinent was carried out.
RESULTS: The data on the medical use of traditional preparations from leaves of 
neem display a wide spectrum of applications. In the Indian subcontinent, neem 
leaves are used to treat dental and gastrointestinal disorders, malaria fevers, 
skin diseases, and as insects repellent, while the Balinese used neem leaves as 
a diuretic and for diabetes, headache, heartburn, and stimulating the appetite. 
Differences in utilisation cannot be related to chemical differences and other 
constituents besides limonoids must be investigated and related to the 
multipurpose activity of neem.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed that neem leaves are believed to treat diabetes 
in both Balinese and Indian communities. Limonoids can not be considered the 
only responsible of digestive properties. Further research would be the 
validation of this report by enzymatic tests and the identification of active 
constituents.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.05.014
PMID: 27178630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Fitoterapia. 2012 Jul;83(5):817-30. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2012.04.012.

Phyto-chemical and pharmacological applications of Berberis aristata.

Potdar D(1), Hirwani RR, Dhulap S.

Author information:
(1)CSIR Unit for Research and Development of Information Products Jopasana, 
Kothrud, Pune, India. diptipotdar99@gmail.com

In the recent years, the interest and research in medicinal plants have 
increased in a great deal. Ayurvedic medicines and formulations developed from 
ancient Indian herbal systems are renowned for their various important 
applications. Berberis aristata - an Indian medicinal plant, which belongs to 
the family Berberidaceae is an ayurvedic herb used since ancient times. It is 
also known as Indian berberi, Daruharidra, Daruhaldi, Darvi and Chitra. The 
plant is useful as anti-pyretic, anti-bacterial, anti-microbial, 
anti-hepatotoxic, anti-hyperglycaemic, anti-cancer, anti-oxidant and 
anti-lipidemic agent. B. aristata extracts and its formulations are also useful 
in the treatment of diarrhoea, haemorrhoids, gynaecological disorders, HIV-AIDS, 
osteoporosis, diabetes, eye and ear infections, wound healing, jaundice, skin 
diseases and malarial fever. This review aims to highlight the ethnobotany, 
pharmacognosy and pharmacological uses of B. aristata which will give insights 
in developing potentially new bioactives from the plant scaffolds. This review 
will also highlight the patenting trends, the new compositions developed using 
the actives from B. aristata and the different assignees involved in filing 
patents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fitote.2012.04.012
PMID: 22808523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Bioinformation. 2009 Dec 31;4(6):263-8. doi: 10.6026/97320630004263.

A database for anti-diabetic plants with clinical / experimental trials.

Singh S(1), Gupta SK, Sabir G, Gupta MK, Seth PK.

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Centre, Biotech Park, Lucknow. saritasingh.bi@gmail.com

A number of plants have been described in Ayurveda and other traditional 
medicine for the management of diabetes. However, information about them is not 
easily available. Active constituents of any medicinal plant define the efficacy 
and safety of treatment to control hyperglycemia. We describe the database to 
maintain the record of medicinal plants having anti-hyperglycemic or 
anti-diabetic activity. The database contains information such as plant name, 
its geographical distribution, useful plant part, known dosage, active 
constituents, mechanism of action and clinical/experimental data. The database 
also includes information about plant raw material suppliers or manufacturers in 
India. The current database includes 238 plants species and 123 Indian 
industries using them.
AVAILABILITY: The database is freely available at 
http://www.biotechpark.org.in/antidia/index.html.

DOI: 10.6026/97320630004263
PMCID: PMC2951713
PMID: 20975921


52. Postgrad Med J. 1994 Feb;70(820):113-4. doi: 10.1136/pgmj.70.820.113.

Indian herbal remedies for diabetes as a cause of lead poisoning.

Keen RW(1), Deacon AC, Delves HT, Moreton JA, Frost PG.

Author information:
(1)Central Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.

Comment in
    Postgrad Med J. 1995 Apr;71(834):251.
    Postgrad Med J. 1994 Oct;70(828):764.

Herbal remedies from the Indian subcontinent have been found to have high 
concentrations of heavy metals and unsupervised treatment may result in 
toxicity. We report the case of an Indian patient with hepatitis who was found 
to have lead poisoning where the source was traced to ethnic remedies he had 
been taking for diabetes.

DOI: 10.1136/pgmj.70.820.113
PMCID: PMC2397634
PMID: 8170881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Altern Complement Med. 2013 Mar;19(3):191-7. doi: 10.1089/acm.2011.0752. Epub 
2012 Oct 2.

Scientific validation of the antidiabetic effects of Syzygium jambolanum DC 
(black plum), a traditional medicinal plant of India.

Baliga MS(1), Fernandes S, Thilakchand KR, D'souza P, Rao S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Research and Development, Father Muller Medical College, 
Kankanady, Mangalore, Karnataka, India. msbaliga@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: In spite of the tremendous progress achieved in medical sciences in 
the last century, the management of diabetes mellitus, a disease as old as 
mankind, is poor. Diabetes is currently the world's largest endocrine disorder, 
and estimates are that it affects almost 5% of the population. Ayurveda, the 
Indian traditional system of medicine, is one of the world's oldest systems to 
have documented the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes.
METHODS: Experimental studies performed in accordance with the modern medicine 
principles have shown that some of the medicinal plants and polyherbal 
preparations made using the plants used in Ayurveda are effective in preventing 
both hyperglycemia and its complications. Syzygium jambolanum (Syn Syzygium 
cumini, Eugenia cumini, Eugenia jambolana), commonly known as black plum and 
originally indigenous to India, is one of the important antidiabetic plants.
RESULTS: Jamun has been used in various complementary and alternative systems of 
medicine and, before the discovery of insulin, was a frontline antidiabetic 
medication even in Europe. The brew prepared by boiling the Jamun seeds in 
boiling water has been used in the various traditional systems of medicine in 
India.
CONCLUSIONS: This review includes the validated antidiabetic effects of Jamun 
and some of its compounds. Emphasis is also placed on addressing the various 
mechanisms of action contributing to the pharmacological effects and the aspects 
that need future investigations for Jamun to be of clinical use.

DOI: 10.1089/acm.2011.0752
PMID: 23030429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2011 Jan;89(1):13-23. doi: 10.1139/y10-104.

Cree antidiabetic plant extracts display mechanism-based inactivation of CYP3A4.

Tam TW(1), Liu R, Arnason JT, Krantis A, Staines WA, Haddad PS, Foster BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, ON, 
Canada.

Seventeen Cree antidiabetic medicinal plants were studied to determine their 
potential to inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) through mechanism-based 
inactivation (MBI). The ethanolic extracts of the medicinal plants were studied 
for their inhibition of CYP3A4 using the substrates testosterone and 
dibenzylfluorescein (DBF) in high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) and 
microtiter fluorometric assays, respectively. Using testosterone as a substrate, 
extracts of Alnus incana, Sarracenia purpurea, and Lycopodium clavatum were 
identified as potent CYP3A4 MBIs, while those from Abies balsamea, Picea 
mariana, Pinus banksiana, Rhododendron tomentosum, Kalmia angustifolia, and 
Picea glauca were identified as less potent inactivators. Not unexpectedly, the 
other substrate, DBF, showed a different profile of inhibition. Only A. balsamea 
was identified as a CYP3A4 MBI using DBF. Abies balsamea displayed both NADPH- 
and time-dependence of CYP3A4 inhibition using both substrates. Overall, several 
of the medicinal plants may markedly deplete CYP3A4 through MBI and, 
consequently, decrease the metabolism of CYP3A4 substrates including numerous 
medications used by diabetics.

DOI: 10.1139/y10-104
PMID: 21186373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Chin J Integr Med. 2011 Aug;17(8):563-74. doi: 10.1007/s11655-011-0810-3. Epub 
2011 Aug 9.

Mechanism of action of natural products used in the treatment of diabetes 
mellitus.

Prabhakar PK(1), Doble M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, 
India.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a metabolic disorder caused by insufficient or 
inefficient insulin secretary response and it is characterized by increased 
blood glucose levels (hyperglycemia). DM is a heterogonous group of syndromes. 
Glucose is the main energy source for the body, and in the case of DM, 
management of glucose becomes irregular. There are three key defects in the 
onset of hyperglycemia in DM, namely increased hepatic glucose production, 
diminished insulin secretion, and impaired insulin action. Conventional drugs 
treat diabetes by improving insulin sensitivity, increasing insulin production 
and/or decreasing the amount of glucose in blood. This article provides a 
comprehensive review of the mode of action of most popular hypoglycemic herbs, 
such as ginseng, bitter melon, fenugreek, banaba, Gymnema sylvestre and Coptis 
chinensis. The herbs act by increasing insulin secretion, enhancing glucose 
uptake by adipose and skeletal muscle tissues, inhibiting intestinal glucose 
absorption and inhibiting hepatic glucose production. Although evidence from 
animals and humans consistently supports the therapeutic effect of these 
phytomedicines, multicenter large-scale clinical trials have not been conducted 
to evaluate the safety and efficacy of these herbal medicines and their 
interaction with conventional drugs when administered simultaneously.

DOI: 10.1007/s11655-011-0810-3
PMID: 21826590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006 Apr 21;105(1-2):55-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2005.09.038. 
Epub 2005 Nov 16.

Plants used by the Cree Nation of Eeyou Istchee (Quebec, Canada) for the 
treatment of diabetes: A novel approach in quantitative ethnobotany.

Leduc C(1), Coonishish J, Haddad P, Cuerrier A.

Author information:
(1)Institut de recherche en biologie végétale, Jardin botanique de Montréal, 
Université de Montréal, 4101 Sherbrooke East, Montréal, Que., Canada H1X 2B2.

In the last decade, the Cree Nation of Eeyou Istchee has witnessed a 150% 
increase in the prevalence of Type II Diabetes (T2D) for people aged over 20 
years. Clinical intervention using conventional therapeutic methods has yielded 
only a limited success within this population. An ethnobotanical survey was 
carried out to identify potentially antidiabetic plant species used within the 
traditional pharmacopoeia of the Cree. Interviews were held with 34 Cree Elders 
using a list of 15 symptoms ranked according to their association to T2D. A 
total of 18 species were cited during the survey, spanning 9 plant families. 
Species were prioritized for pharmacological analysis according to a Syndromic 
Importance Value, based on their frequency of citation by informants and the 
number and specificity of symptoms for which they were used. Correspondence and 
clustering analyses were also performed to determine the specificity of 
association between species and symptoms and the symptom-based correlation 
between species. A data matrix and species ranking order generated from 
Cree-specific literature demonstrates significant similarity and correlation to 
our original matrix and ranking, respectively. This article demonstrates the 
applicability of various underutilized quantitative tools in ethnobotany, while 
taking a convincing preliminary step towards a therapy more in harmony with Cree 
culture and lifestyle.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2005.09.038
PMID: 16297584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Bull Indian Inst Hist Med Hyderabad. 2000 Jan-Jun;30(1):15-26.

Screening of Madhumehaghna (anti diabetic) plants in Vrihattrayee.

Nanda GC, Padhi MM, Pathak NN, Choppra KK.

The three texts written by Charak, Sushrut and Vagbhat are considered as 
Vrihattrayee because of their original contributions to the basic tenants of 
Ayurveda and innovative uses of plants and medicine. But despite the possibility 
of exploring efficacious for mulations from among these classics, not much 
attempts have been made in this direction, due to the fact that now most of them 
are not in vogue in practice by majority of Ayurvedic physicians. As such, a 
glossary of plants as described in those texts for the management of prameha 
including diabetes has been collected which would be useful for studying these 
drugs from different angles.

PMID: 12578004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2015 Aug 4;15:262. doi: 10.1186/s12906-015-0683-7.

SerpentinaDB: a database of plant-derived molecules of Rauvolfia serpentina.

Pathania S(1), Ramakrishnan SM(2), Randhawa V(3)(4), Bagler G(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, 
India. shivalika20@gmail.com.
(2)Centre for Biologically Inspired Systems Science, Indian Institute of 
Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India. saimukundbioinfo@gmail.com.
(3)Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, 
India. vinay.plp@gmail.com.
(4)Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. 
vinay.plp@gmail.com.
(5)Biotechnology Division, CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh, 
India. bagler@iitj.ac.in.
(6)Centre for Biologically Inspired Systems Science, Indian Institute of 
Technology Jodhpur, Jodhpur, India. bagler@iitj.ac.in.
(7)Academy of Scientific & Innovative Research (AcSIR), New Delhi, India. 
bagler@iitj.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: Plant-derived molecules (PDMs) are known to be a rich source of 
diverse scaffolds that could serve as a basis for rational drug design. 
Structured compilation of phytochemicals from traditional medicinal plants can 
facilitate prospection for novel PDMs and their analogs as therapeutic agents. 
Rauvolfia serpentina is an important medicinal plant, endemic to Himalayan 
mountain ranges of Indian subcontinent, reported to be of immense therapeutic 
value against various diseases.
DESCRIPTION: We present SerpentinaDB, a structured compilation of 147 R. 
serpentina PDMs, inclusive of their plant part source, chemical classification, 
IUPAC, SMILES, physicochemical properties, and 3D chemical structures with 
associated references. It also provides refined search option for identification 
of analogs of natural molecules against ZINC database at user-defined cut-off.
CONCLUSION: SerpentinaDB is an exhaustive resource of R. serpentina molecules 
facilitating prospection for therapeutic molecules from a medicinally important 
source of natural products. It also provides refined search option to explore 
the neighborhood of chemical space against ZINC database to identify analogs of 
natural molecules obtained as leads. In a previous study, we have demonstrated 
the utility of this resource by identifying novel aldose reductase inhibitors 
towards intervention of complications of diabetes.

DOI: 10.1186/s12906-015-0683-7
PMCID: PMC4523024
PMID: 26238452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Curr Top Med Chem. 2012;12(12):1356-62. doi: 10.2174/156802612801319034.

Strategies and techniques for multi-component drug design from medicinal herbs 
and traditional Chinese medicine.

Wang Y(1), Fan X, Qu H, Gao X, Cheng Y.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Informatics Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, 
China.

Many common diseases like diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer are 
caused or exacerbated by disparate physiological, pathological, environmental, 
and lifestyle factors. However, the chief aim of current drug discovery 
approaches is to search for single-entity drugs that interact with well-defined 
molecular targets (a single receptor or enzyme). The concept of multi-target 
drugs or multi-component therapy is gaining increased attention with the 
discovery that many diseases (like hypertension) are best treated by multi-drug 
or multi-target therapies. Traditional medicines, such as traditional Chinese 
medicine (TCM) and Indian Ayurveda, have been re-evaluated and are becoming 
important resources for the discovery of bioactive molecules with therapeutic 
effects and for designing multi-targets drugs. This article provides an overview 
of new strategies and techniques to design therapeutic regimes that comprise 
more than one active ingredient to produce synergistic effects by simultaneously 
interacting with multiple molecular targets. Advances in phytochemistry, high 
throughput screening, DNA sequencing, systems biology, and bioinformatics can 
reveal the chemical composition and molecular mechanisms of TCM and together 
provide a new template for the early stages of drug discovery. Meanwhile, 
clinical knowledge of TCM provides a promising framework for multi-component 
drug design. A renaissance of multi-component drug discovery inspired by 
traditional medicine is possible.

DOI: 10.2174/156802612801319034
PMID: 22690682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. West Indian Med J. 2015 Dec;64(5):527-532. doi: 10.7727/wimj.2016.176. Epub 2016 
Apr 29.

Recent Progress for the Utilization of Curcuma longa, Piper nigrum and Phoenix 
dactylifera Seeds against Type 2 Diabetes.

Khaliq T(1), Sarfraz M(2), Ashraf MA(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacy, Physiology and Pharmacology, University of 
Agriculture, Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan.
(2)Institute of Pharmacy, Physiology and Pharmacology, University of 
Agriculture, Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan. E-mail: maliha.sarfraz@uaf.edu.pk.
(3)Faculty of Science and Natural Resources, Universiti Malaysia Sabah, 88400 
Kota Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia.
(4)Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, School of Environmental 
Studies, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan 430074, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus is an important human disease afflicting many from 
various walks of life in different countries. Even though modern medicines 
contribute a variety of effective treatment options, they can have several 
unfavourable effects. The intention of this review is to organize and discuss 
various studies that have been previously conducted on the effectiveness of 
these herbal plants in diabetes.
METHOD: By using various electronic search databases, a comprehensive English 
literature search was conducted. Different search terms were used by combining 
all the search fields in titles, abstracts and keywords.
RESULTS: Curcuma longa,a spice, is commonly known as turmeric and belongs to the 
family Zingiberaceae. Piper nigrumis also a spice, commonly called black pepper, 
and belongs to the family Piperaceae. Phoenix dactylifera, commonly known as 
date fruit, belongs to the family Arecaceae. From ancient times, they have been 
traditionally used for the treatment of various diseases. Among various 
activities, regulation of hyperglycaemia is considered one of their important 
effects. One of the aetiological factors implicated in the development of 
diabetes and its complications is the damage induced by free radicals. 
Antioxidant properties of antidiabetic compounds would be more beneficial. 
Extracts of these plants have shown hypoglycaemic and hypolipidaemic effects by 
the involvement of several mechanisms. In the future, further studies are needed 
to investigate the mechanisms involved in their hypoglycaemic potential and 
their active constituents as synthetic analogues.
CONCLUSIONS: This review focusses on some medicinal plants that have 
antidiabetic effect, thus contributing to the reduction of risk factors 
associated with diabetes, and related beneficial effects are compiled.

ANTECEDENTES: La diabetes mellitus es una enfermedad importante que afecta a 
muchos seres humanos en distintos ámbitos de la vida en diferentes países. 
Aunque los medicamentos modernos aportan una variedad de opciones para un 
tratamiento efectivo, los mismos tienen varios efectos desfavorables. La 
intención de este estudio es organizar y revisar diversos estudios que se han 
realizado anteriormente sobre la efectividad de estas plantas herbales en la 
diabetes.
MÉTODO: Mediante el uso de varias bases de datos de búsqueda electrónica, se 
realizó una búsqueda amplia de la literatura inglés. Se utilizaron términos de 
búsqueda combinando todos los campos de búsqueda en títulos, resúmenes y 
palabras claves.
RESULTADOS: Curcuma longa, una especia, es comúnmente conocida como cúrcuma, y 
pertenece a la familia Zingiberaceae. Piper nigrum, también una especia, 
comúnmente se conoce como pimienta negra, y pertenece a la familia Piperaceae. 
Finalmente, Phoenix dactylifera, comúnmente conocida como palma datilera, 
pertenece a la familia Arecaceae. Desde la antigüedad, estas plantas se han 
utilizado tradicionalmente para el tratamiento de diversas enfermedades. Entre 
sus usos diversos, la regulación del potencial hiperglicémico es considerado uno 
de los efectos importantes. Uno de los factores etiológicos implicados en el 
desarrollo de la diabetes y sus complicaciones es el daño inducido por radicales 
libres. Las propiedades antioxidantes de los compuestos antidiabéticos serían 
más beneficiosas. Los extractos de estas plantas han mostrado poseer efectos 
hipoglicémicos e hipolipidémicos por medio de la participación de varios 
mecanismos. En el futuro, más estudios son necesarios para investigar los 
mecanismos implicados en su potencial hipoglicémico y sus componentes activos 
como análogos sintéticos.
CONCLUSIONES: Esta revisión se centra en algunas plantas medicinales que tienen 
efectos antidiabéticos, contribuyendo así a la reducción de factores de riesgo 
asociados con la diabetes. Asimismo, se compilan efectos beneficiosos 
relacionados.

DOI: 10.7727/wimj.2016.176
PMCID: PMC4961342
PMID: 27399905

Conflict of interest statement: AUTHORS’ NOTE The authors certify that there is 
no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material 
discussed in the paper. TK carried out the design and coordinated the study; MS 
and MAA participated in most of the experiments and prepared the manuscript and 
also provide assistance in the design of the study. All authors have read and 
approved the content of the manuscript.


61. Phytochem Anal. 2010 Jul-Aug;21(4):328-39. doi: 10.1002/pca.1203.

A RP-HPLC-DAD-APCI/MSD method for the characterisation of medicinal Ericaceae 
used by the Eeyou Istchee Cree First Nations.

Saleem A(1), Harris CS, Asim M, Cuerrier A, Martineau L, Haddad PS, Arnason JT.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for the Analysis of Natural and Synthetic Environmental Toxins 
(LANSET), Centre for Research in Biotechnology and Biopharmaceuticals, 
Department of Biology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N6N5, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Ericaceae medicinal plants are traditionally used by the Eeyou 
Istchee Cree and other northern peoples of North America to treat type 2 
diabetic symptoms. Because of the importance of phenolics as potential cures for 
degenerative diseases including type 2 diabetes, an analytical method was 
developed to detect them in the leaf extracts of 14 Ericaceae plants.
OBJECTIVE: To develop an optimised method which is applicable to a relatively 
large number of Ericaceae plants using their leaf extracts. For this purpose 
phenolics with a wide range of polarity, including a glucosylated benzoquinone, 
two phenolic acids, three flavanols, a flavanone, a flavone and five flavonols, 
were included in this study.
METHODOLOGY: Characterisation of phytochemicals in extracts was undertaken by 
automated matching to the UV spectra to those of an in house library of plant 
secondary metabolites and the authentication of their identity was achieved by 
reversed phase-high-performance chromatography-diode array detection-atmospheric 
pressure chemical ionisation/mass selective detection.
RESULTS: Twenty-six phenolics were characterised within 26 min of 
chromatographic separation in 80% ethanol extracts of 14 Ericaceae plants. The 
calibration curves were linear within 0.5-880 microg/g dry mass of the plant 
with regression values better than 0.995. The limits of detection ranged from 
0.3 for microg/mL for (+)-catechin to 2.6 microg/mL for chlorogenic acid. This 
is a first study dealing with relatively large number of Ericaceae extracts and 
is applicable to other plants of same family.

DOI: 10.1002/pca.1203
PMID: 20135709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;18(2):142-9. doi: 10.4103/2230-8210.129103.

Diabetes and related remedies in medieval Persian medicine.

Zarshenas MM(1), Khademian S(2), Moein M(3).

Author information:
(1)Medicinal Plants Processing Research Center, Shiraz, Iran ; Essence of 
Parsiyan Wisdom Institute, Traditional Medicine and Medicinal Plant Incubator, 
Shiraz, Iran ; Research Office for the History of Persian Medicine, Shiraz 
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Department of Traditional Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy, Shiraz University of 
Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy, Shiraz University of Medical 
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

Diabetes Mellitus is a common metabolic disorder presenting increased amounts of 
serum glucose and will cover 5.4% of population by year 2025. Accordingly, this 
review was performed to gather and discuss the stand points on diagnosis, 
pathophysiology, non-pharmacological therapy and drug management of diabetes 
this disorder as described in medieval Persian medicine. To this, reports on 
diabetes were collected and analyzed from selected medical and pharmaceutical 
textbooks of Traditional Persian Medicine. A search on databases as Pubmed, 
Sciencedirect, Scopus and Google scholar was also performed to reconfirm the 
Anti diabetic activities of reported herbs. The term, Ziabites, was used to 
describe what is now spoken as diabetes. It was reported that Ziabites, is 
highly associated with kidney function. Etiologically, Ziabites was 
characterized as kidney hot or cold dystemperament as well as diffusion of fluid 
from other organs such as liver and intestines into the kidneys. This disorder 
was categorized into main types as hot (Ziabites-e-har) and cold 
(Ziabites-e-barid) as well as sweet urine (Bole-e-shirin). Most medieval cite 
signs of Ziabites were remarked as unusual and excessive thirst, frequent 
urination and polydipsia. On the management, life style modification and 
observing the essential rules of prevention in Persian medicine as well as 
herbal therapy and special simple manipulations were recommended. Current 
investigation was done to clarify the knowledge of medieval scientists on 
diabetes and related interventions. Reported remedies which are based on 
centuries of experience might be of beneficial for- further studies to the 
management of diabetes.

DOI: 10.4103/2230-8210.129103
PMCID: PMC3987262
PMID: 24741508

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.


63. Pharm Biol. 2017 Dec;55(1):68-75. doi: 10.1080/13880209.2016.1228683. Epub 2016 
Sep 8.

Attenuation of glycation-induced multiple protein modifications by Indian 
antidiabetic plant extracts.

Tupe RS(1), Kemse NG(1), Khaire AA(1), Shaikh SA(1).

Author information:
(1)a Biochemical Sciences Division, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of IT and 
Biotechnology , Bharati Vidyapeeth University , Pune , Maharashtra , India.

CONTEXT: Protein glycation is the major contributing factor in the development 
of diabetic complications. The antiglycation potential of medicinal plants 
provides a promising opportunity as complementary interventions for 
complications.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the antiglycation potential of 19 medicinal plants 
extracts using albumin by estimating different indicators: (1) glycation (early 
and late), (2) albumin oxidation, and (3) amyloid aggregation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effect of aqueous plant extracts (1% w/v) on protein 
glycation was assessed by incubating albumin (10 mg/mL) with fructose (250 mM) 
for 4 days. Degree of protein glycation in the absence and presence of plant 
extracts was assessed by estimating fructosamine, advanced glycation end 
products (AGEs), carbonyls, free thiol group and β-amyloid aggregation.
RESULTS: Petroselinum crispum, Boerhavia diffusa, Terminalia chebula, Swertia 
chirayita and Glycyrrhiza glabra showed significant antiglycating activity. P. 
crispum and A. barbadensis inhibited the carbonyl stress and protected the thiol 
group from oxidative damage. There was significant correlation between protein 
thiols and amyloid inhibition (R = -.69, p < .001).
CONCLUSION: P. crispum, B. diffusa and T. chebula had the most potent 
antiglycation activity. These plant exerted noticeable antiglycation activity at 
different glycation modifications of albumin. These findings are important for 
identifying plants with potential to combat diabetic complications.

DOI: 10.1080/13880209.2016.1228683
PMCID: PMC7011994
PMID: 27608964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Altern Complement Med. 2009 Nov;15(11):1215-21. doi: 10.1089/acm.2009.0187.

Indigenous drugs in ischemic heart disease in patients with diabetes.

Dwivedi S(1), Aggarwal A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine/Preventive Cardiology, University College of Medical 
Sciences, University of Delhi and GTB Hospital, Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: India is currently facing the silent epidemic of ischemic heart 
disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), hypertension, and stroke. Both 
diabetes and ischemic heart disease appear in Indian people a decade earlier 
compared to whites. The recent evidence that certain medicinal plants possess 
hypoglycemic, lipid-lowering, and immunomodulating properties on account of 
their rich flavonoid and/or other glucose-lowering active constituents merits 
scientific scrutiny in this regard.
OBJECTIVES: The present communication aims to give a brief review of those 
plants that could be useful in T2DM associated with hypertension, ischemic heart 
disease, and/or dyslipidemia.
METHODS: Aegle marmelos (bael), Allium sativum (garlic), Curcuma domestica 
(turmeric), Eugenia jambolana (jamun), Murraya koenigii (curry leaves), 
Trigonella foenum graecum (fenugreek), and Terminalia arjuna (arjun) have been 
found to be useful in diabetes associated with ischemic heart disease. Their 
active biomolecules have been identified. They have also been demonstrated to be 
safe in long-term use.
CONCLUSIONS: Further clinical research regarding their potency and efficacy 
vis-à-vis oral hypoglycemics needs to done.

DOI: 10.1089/acm.2009.0187
PMID: 19922253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Apr 2;181:66-107. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.032. Epub 
2016 Jan 23.

Ethnobotany, phytochemistry, and pharmacology of the genus Litsea: An update.

Wang YS(1), Wen ZQ(2), Li BT(2), Zhang HB(1), Yang JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry for Natural Resource, Ministry of 
Education, School of Chemical Science and Technology, Yunnan University, Kunming 
650091, PR China.
(2)First Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming 650031, PR 
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemistry for Natural Resource, Ministry of 
Education, School of Chemical Science and Technology, Yunnan University, Kunming 
650091, PR China. Electronic address: yangjh@ynu.edu.cn.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The genus Litsea is one of the most diverse 
genera of evergreen trees or shrubs belong to Lauraceae, and comprises roughly 
400 species of tree that are distributed abundantly throughout tropical and 
subtropical Asia, North and South America. Litsea species have been used 
globally in traditional medicine for the treatment of various diseases including 
influenza, stomach aches, diarrhea, diabetes, vomiting, bone pain, inflammation, 
illness related to the central nervous system and other ailments. The purpose of 
this review is to provide updated, comprehensive and categorized information on 
the ethnobotany, phytochemistry and pharmacological research of Litsea species 
in order to explore their therapeutic potential and evaluate future research 
opportunities.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: All the available information on Litsea species was 
actualised by systematically searching the scientiﬁc literatures including 
Chinese, Korean, Japanese, Indian, and South American herbal classics, library 
catalogs and scientiﬁc databases (PubMed, SciFinder, Web of Science, Google 
Scholar, VIP and Wanfang). The Plant List, International Plant Name index and 
Scientific Database of China Plant Species were used to validate scientiﬁc 
names.
RESULTS: 407 secondary metabolites have been reported from Litsea species. 
Litsea Species are sources of secondary metabolites with interesting chemical 
structures (alkaloids, lactones, sesquiterpenes, flavonoids, lignans, and 
essential oils) and significant bioactivities. Crude extracts, fractions and 
phytochemical constituents isolated from Litsea show a wide spectrum of in vitro 
and in vivo pharmacological activities including anticancer, anti-inflammatory, 
antimicrobial, antioxidant, antidiabetic, anti-HIV, insecticidal, etc.
CONCLUSIONS: From data collected in this review, the genus Litsea comprises a 
wide range of therapeutically promising and valuable plants, and has attracted 
much attention owing to its multiple functions. Many traditional uses of Litsea 
species have now been validated by modern pharmacology research. Deep and 
systematic phytochemical investigation of the genus Litsea and the 
pharmacological properties, especially its mechanism of action and toxicology, 
to illustrate its ethnomedicinal use, explore the therapeutic potential and 
support further health-care product development will undoubtedly be the focus of 
further research. Therefore, detailed and extensive studies and clinical 
evaluation of Litsea species should be carried out in future for the safety 
approval of therapeutic applications.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.01.032
PMID: 26812679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Nov 11;132(2):473-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.07.055. 
Epub 2010 Sep 9.

Inhibition of intestinal glucose absorption by anti-diabetic medicinal plants 
derived from the James Bay Cree traditional pharmacopeia.

Nistor Baldea LA(1), Martineau LC, Benhaddou-Andaloussi A, Arnason JT, Lévy É, 
Haddad PS.

Author information:
(1)Natural Health Products and Metabolic Diseases Laboratory, Department of 
Pharmacology, Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Type II diabetes and obesity are major health problems worldwide and 
aboriginal peoples are particularly at risk. To address this problem in Canadian 
native populations who find modern pharmaceuticals culturally inappropriate, our 
team is testing the traditional pharmacopeia of the James Bay Cree for 
anti-diabetic and anti-obesity activities. More specifically, the aim of the 
present study was to define the effects of traditional plants on intestinal 
glucose absorption, an under-appreciated anti-hyperglycaemic and anti-obesity 
activity.
METHODS: Crude ethanol extracts of 17 Boreal forest medicinal plants were tested 
in vitro using the Caco-2 human enterocytic cell line and in vivo using an oral 
glucose tolerance test.
RESULTS: Thirteen of seventeen extracts were observed to significantly inhibit 
uptake when administered simultaneously with (3)H-deoxyglucose. Inhibition was 
dose-dependent and, in a few cases, even surpassed that induced by a combination 
of the positive controls. To validate these effects in vivo, four plant extracts 
were administered by intragastric gavage at 250 mg/kg to normal rats 
simultaneously with a 3g/kg bolus of glucose. This resulted in a decrease in 
peak glycaemia by approximately 40% for two of them. Similarly, only 2 extracts 
reduced glucose transport after long term incubation and this could be related 
to reductions in the expression of SGLT-1 or GLUT-2 proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that competitive inhibition of intestinal 
glucose uptake can be achieved by crude extracts of medicinal plants. Such 
extracts could be taken with meals to control postprandial glycaemia and reduce 
caloric intake in high risk populations that are positively inclined towards 
traditional medicine.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.07.055
PMID: 20804840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2019 Jan;187(1):14-27. doi: 10.1007/s12010-018-2798-z. 
Epub 2018 Jun 6.

Evaluation of Antidiabetic Potential of Sarcostemma brevistigma Wight & Arn. 
Using Alloxan-Induced Diabetic Murine Model.

Vijayalakshmi K(1), Selvaraj CI(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Scholar, Department of Biotechnology, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632 014, 
India.
(2)Research Scholar, Department of Biotechnology, School of Biosciences and 
Technology, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 632 014, 
India. immanuelselvaraj@vit.ac.in.

A multimillion-dollar boom is achieved every year by the ethnopharmaceutical 
companies, creating awareness around the globe to use herbal medicines to stay 
and live a healthy life. Nearly, two-thirds of the plants were discovered for 
herbal remedies, and some plants are even endangered to get extinct from the 
globe for their repeated utility. Sarcostemma brevistigma is one among the 
undiscovered medicinal plants which belongs to the family Asclepiadaceae found 
distributed in Indian states of Bihar, Bengal, Konkan, Tamil Nadu, and Kerala. 
This study was intended to determine the antidiabetic property of plant extract 
of Sarcostemma brevistigma evidenced by biochemical parameters, antioxidant 
activity, with the histopathological analysis in diabetic induced mice. Animals 
that were orally treated with the S. brevistigma extract showed blood glucose 
lowering effect when compared to the alloxan-induced mice, i.e., from 
391.5 ± 6.3 to 193.6 ± 4.3 mg/dL. There is the significant increase in insulin 
level (P < 0.05) (27.97 ± 1.6 mIU/L) which is comparable to the metformin 
administered test group (30.35 ± 0.6 mIU/L). A significant difference (P < 0.05) 
of both ALT and AST levels were observed when compared to the other groups. A 
significant increase in antioxidant activity (reduced glutathione, 
malondialdehyde, superoxide dismutase) in plant extract administered group was 
observed when compared to the other treatment groups. Histopathological studies 
showed abnormalities in the liver, pancreas, kidney, lungs, heart, and spleen of 
alloxan-induced diabetic rats. The abnormalities were found to be normalized to 
a considerable extent after treatment with S. brevistigma extract. The results 
stood as evidence for S. brevistigma as an active antidiabetic herbal plant.

DOI: 10.1007/s12010-018-2798-z
PMID: 29872991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J AOAC Int. 2018 Nov 1;101(6):1773-1780. doi: 10.5740/jaoacint.18-0081. Epub 
2018 Jun 26.

Extraction Optimization for Phenolic- and Withanolide-Rich Fractions from 
Withania somnifera Roots: Identification and Quantification of Withaferin A, 
12-Deoxywithastromonolide, and Withanolide A in Plant Materials and Marketed 
Formulations Using a Reversed-Phase HPLC-Photodiode Array Detection Method.

Kumar S(1), Singh R(1), Gajbhiye N, Dhanani T(1).

Author information:
(1)Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Directorate of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants Research, Boriavi, Anand, Gujarat, India 387310.

Background: Both the roots and leaves of Withania somnifera are products of 
commerce. They contain active compounds of therapeutic value and mostly 
different withanolides. Several pharmacological activities of W. somnifera have 
links to one or more withanolides. The presence of phenolic compounds in 
extracts could play a vital role in the reduction of blood glucose levels in 
diabetic subjects. Objective: The present study was carried out for the 
selection of a solvent to prepare extracts rich in phenolics, withaferin A (WA), 
12-deoxywithastromonolide (12WD), and withanolide A (WDA). A simple, rapid HPLC 
method was also developed for the identification and quantification of WA, 12WD, 
and WDA. Methods: The extraction efficiency of aqueous alcoholic solvents 
including hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, and methanol were compared for 
three selected withanolides and total phenolic content. The contents of WA, 
12WD, and WDA and total phenolics were determined in the extracts. The quality 
of nine formulations containing W. sominfera were also compared in terms of the 
content of WA, 12WD, and WDA and total phenolics. Results: The maximum extract 
yield and the total withanolide and phenolic content were obtained from aqueous 
alcoholic compositions at 50:50 (v/v), 70:30 (v/v), and 100:0 (v/v), 
respectively. In the case of organic solvents, chloroform and ethyl acetate 
yielded the highest concentrations of phenolics and three withanolides, 
respectively. The total phenolic content in formulations was in the range of 
1.84-3.13%, and total withanolide content showed wide variability. Conclusions: 
The outcome of the present investigation could be utilized for the selection of 
extraction solvents to prepare W. somnifera-enriched extracts and their quality 
monitoring by using the developed and validated HPLC-Photodiode array detection 
method. Highlights: A process for preparation of phenolics and withanolides 
(withaferin A, 12-deoxywithastramonolide and withanolide A) enriched extracts of 
Withania somnifera. Simple and rapid HPLC method was also developed and 
validated as per the ICH guidelines for identification and quantification of 
three major withanolides. The developed HPLC method was applied to analyze the 
quality of extracts and marketed herbal products (mono, as well as poly 
constituents). Optimized extraction process could be utilized for upscaling 
process development in preparation of enriched extracts from Withania somnifera, 
crop improvement, bio-prospection studies and quality control.

DOI: 10.5740/jaoacint.18-0081
PMID: 29945694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Phytomedicine. 2014 Apr 15;21(5):624-30. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2013.12.002. Epub 
2014 Jan 22.

Anti-diabetic effect of a novel N-Trisaccharide isolated from Cucumis 
prophetarum on streptozotocin-nicotinamide induced type 2 diabetic rats.

Kavishankar GB(1), Lakshmidevi N(2).

Author information:
(1)DOS in Microbiology, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri, Mysore 570 006, 
Karnataka, India; DOS in Biochemistry, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri, 
Mysore 570 006, Karnataka, India.
(2)DOS in Microbiology, University of Mysore, Manasagangotri, Mysore 570 006, 
Karnataka, India. Electronic address: nlakshmidevi7@gmail.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Cucumis prophetarum (L.) is used in traditional 
Indian medicine for the treatment of inflammation related problems.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The present investigation was designed to study the effect of 
N-Trisaccharide (a new compound isolated from the fruit of C. prophetarum (L.)) 
on hyperglycemia in streptozotocin (STZ)-nicotinamide (NA) induced type 2 
diabetic rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Different doses of N-Trisaccharide (25 and 50 mg/kgb.w.) 
were administered once daily for 28 days to STZ-NA induced diabetic rats. Plasma 
insulin and glycogen levels were measured. The activities of hexokinase, 
glucose-6-phosphatase, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase, glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase, glycogen synthase and glycogen phosphorylase were measured. 
Further, histological studies on pancreas were also carried out.
RESULTS: The active compound at doses of 25 and 50 mg/kgb.w. given orally for 14 
days showed 47.7% and 69.3% antihyperglycemic activity, respectively. Treatment 
at the same doses for 28 days provided complete protection against STZ-NA 
challenge (65 and 230 mg/kgb.w., respectively), intraperitoneally. 
N-Trisaccharide significantly (p≤0.05) increased the plasma insulin and liver 
glycogen levels in diabetic rats. The altered enzyme activities of carbohydrate 
metabolism in the liver and kidney of the diabetic rats were significantly 
(p≤0.05) improved. Additionally, N-Trisaccharide increased glycogen synthase and 
decreased glycogen phosphorylase activity in diabetic rats. Histological studies 
confirmed an increase in insulin level is due to stimulation of injured 
pancreatic β-cells.
CONCLUSION: The results of the study suggested that N-Trisaccharide possesses 
propitious effect on STZ-NA induced type 2 diabetes, indicating its usefulness 
in diabetes management.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2013.12.002
PMID: 24462215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Integr Med. 2014 Mar;12(2):86-93. doi: 10.1016/S2095-4964(14)60018-2.

Pharmacological effects and active phytoconstituents of Swietenia mahagoni: a 
review.

Naveen YP(1), Divya Rupini G(1), Ahmed F(2), Urooj A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Studies in Food Science and Nutrition, University of Mysore, 
Manasagangothri, Mysore-570006, India.
(2)Indian Institute of Crop Processing Technology, Ministry of Food Processing 
Industries, Government of India, Thanjavur-613005, India.
(3)Department of Studies in Food Science and Nutrition, University of Mysore, 
Manasagangothri, Mysore-570006, India; E-mail: 
asnaurooj@foodsci.uni.mysore.ac.in.

The usage of Swietenia mahagoni, a popular medicinal plant in India and some 
African countries, dates back to ancient times for its curative properties in 
diseases like malaria, diabetes, and diarrhea. It is also used as an 
anti-pyretic, bitter tonic and astringent. Its pharmacological activities are 
being widely explored. Although many important groups of phytochemicals have 
been identified and isolated from various parts of the plant, most of these 
researches have been focused on seeds. Toxicological studies have established 
the safety of many of these plant extracts, and found insignificant side 
effects. Here we present a comprehensive review of all the pharmacological 
effects and constituent phytochemicals of the plant.

DOI: 10.1016/S2095-4964(14)60018-2
PMID: 24666674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Molecules. 2013 Dec 4;18(12):14892-919. doi: 10.3390/molecules181214892.

C-4 gem-dimethylated oleanes of Gymnema sylvestre and their pharmacological 
activities.

Di Fabio G(1), Romanucci V, Zarrelli M, Giordano M, Zarrelli A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Sciences, University Federico II, Complesso 
Universitario Monte S. Angelo, Via Cintia 4, Napoli 80126, Italy. 
zarrelli@unina.it.

Gymnema sylvestre R. Br., one of the most important medicinal plants of the 
Asclepiadaceae family, is a herb distributed throughout the World, predominantly 
in tropical countries. The plant, widely used for the treatment of diabetes and 
as a diuretic in Indian proprietary medicines, possesses beneficial digestive, 
anti-inflammatory, hypoglycemic and anti-helmentic effects. Furthermore, it is 
believed to be useful in the treatment of dyspepsia, constipation, jaundice, 
hemorrhoids, cardiopathy, asthma, bronchitis and leucoderma. A literature survey 
revealed that some other notable pharmacological activities of the plant such as 
anti-obesity, hypolipidemic, antimicrobial, free radical scavenging and 
anti-inflammatory properties have been proven too. This paper aims to summarize 
the chemical and pharmacological reports on a large group of C-4 
gem-dimethylated pentacyclic triterpenoids from Gymnema sylvestre.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules181214892
PMCID: PMC6269971
PMID: 24304585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Ethnopharmacol. 2016 Dec 4;193:500-509. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.09.050. Epub 
2016 Sep 27.

Symplocos cochinchinensis enhances insulin sensitivity via the down regulation 
of lipogenesis and insulin resistance in high energy diet rat model.

Antu KA(1), Riya MP(1), Nair A(1), Mishra A(2), Srivastava AK(2), Raghu KG(3).

Author information:
(1)Agroprocessing and Natural Products Division, CSIR - National Institute for 
Interdisciplinary Science and Technology(NIIST), Thiruvananthapuram 695019, 
Kerala, India.
(2)Division of Biochemistry, CSIR - Central Drug Research Institute(CDRI), 
Sector 10, Janakipuram Extension, Sitapur Road, Lucknow 226031, Uttar Pradesh, 
India.
(3)Agroprocessing and Natural Products Division, CSIR - National Institute for 
Interdisciplinary Science and Technology(NIIST), Thiruvananthapuram 695019, 
Kerala, India. Electronic address: raghukgopal@niist.res.in.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: This plant has been utilized in Indian system of 
medicine for treatment of diabetes. This is clearly evident from the composition 
of Ayurvedic preparation for diabetes 'Nisakathakadi Kashayam' where this is one 
of the main ingredients of this preparation AIM OF THE STUDY: The study aims in 
elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying the insulin sensitizing effects 
of Symplocos cochinchinensis ethanol extract (SCE) using a high fructose and 
saturated fat (HFS) fed insulin resistant rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Experimental groups consisted of normal diet (ND), ND+SCE 
500mg/kg bwd, HFS+vehicle, HFS+metformin 100mg/kg bwd, HFS+SCE 250/500mg/kg bwd. 
Initially the animals were kept under HFS diet for 8 weeks, and at the end of 8 
week period, animals were found to develop insulin resistance and dyslipidemia. 
Post-administration of SCE, metformin or vehicle were carried out for 3 weeks. 
Gene and protein expressions relevant to insulin signalling pathway were 
analysed.
RESULTS: HFS significantly altered the normal physiology of animals via proteins 
and genes relevant to metabolism like stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD1), sterol 
regulatory element binding protein 1 (SREBP-1c), fatty acid synthase (FAS), 
glucose 6 phosphatase (G6Pase), phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), 
glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2), protein tyrosine phosphatse 1B (PTP1B), 
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPAR alpha), sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) 
and glucokinase. SCE administration attenuates the insulin resistance in HFS rat 
by the down regulation of SCD1 gene expression that modulates SREBP-1c dependent 
and independent hepatic lipid accumulation.
CONCLUSION: SCE enhances insulin sensitivity via the down regulation of 
lipogenesis and insulin resistance in HFS rat model.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.09.050
PMID: 27686268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 Sep 11;155(2):1171-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.06.050. 
Epub 2014 Jul 8.

In-vitro and in-vivo antiadipogenic, hypolipidemic and antidiabetic activity of 
Diospyros melanoxylon (Roxb).

Rathore K(1), Singh VK(2), Jain P(3), Rao SP(4), Ahmed Z(5), Singh VD(6).

Author information:
(1)University Teaching Department, Sarguja University, Amibakpur, Chhattisgarh, 
India. Electronic address: kalpanarathore.rathore@gmail.com.
(2)Columbia Institute of Pharmacy, Village Tekari, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India. 
Electronic address: vijaysingh1207@gmail.com.
(3)Columbia Institute of Pharmacy, Village Tekari, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India. 
Electronic address: paragjain1510@gmail.com.
(4)Columbia Institute of Pharmacy, Village Tekari, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India. 
Electronic address: spr_pharma@yahoo.co.in.
(5)Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir, India. 
Electronic address: zahmed@iiim.res.in.
(6)University Institute of Pharmacy, Pt. Ravishankar Shukla University, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India. Electronic address: veena1806@gmail.com.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The plant Diospyros melanoxylon (Roxb) belongs 
to the family Ebenaceae that is native to India and Sri-lanka. This is a 
medium-sized tree, reaching a height of 15 m and is well known for its beedi 
making leaves throughout the world. The purpose of the present study is to 
assess the effect of Diospyros melanoxylon leaves petroleum ether extract on 
blood glucose level, lipid level, insulin level, body weight, water and food 
intake in Streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two different doses of extract AK001 (250 mg/kg) and 
AK002 (500 mg/kg) of Diospyros melanoxylon leaves were taken to evaluate 
different activities. The animals were divided into five groups namely normal 
control, diabetic control, reference group, AK001 and AK002 each containing six 
animals for in-vivo study. In-vitro study for antiadipogen activity was 
performed on 3T3-L1 cell line.
RESULTS: The extract showed dose dependent fall in Fasting Glucose Level (FSG) 
in experimental diabetic animals with significant reduction in food and water 
intake and increase in body weight. The extract exhibited hypocholesterolemic 
and hypotriglyceridemic effects while increased level of HDL in diabetes induced 
rats. In-vitro activity showed more than 75% viability of cells and significant 
inhibition in differentiated cells as compared to non-differentiate cells in 
3T3-L1 cell line. The extract exhibited the concentration-dependent inhibitory 
effect with an IC50 value of 689.22 μg/ml.
CONCLUSIONS: The extract exhibited significant results for antiadipogenic, 
antidiabetic and hypolipidemic activity both in-vivo and in-vitro and it may 
prove to be effective for the treatment of both types of diabetes, i.e. Insulin 
Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM) and Noninsulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus 
(NIDDM).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.06.050
PMID: 25010927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Ethnopharmacol. 2002 Jul;81(2):155-60. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00034-x.

Anti-diabetic activity of medicinal plants and its relationship with their 
antioxidant property.

Sabu MC(1), Kuttan R.

Author information:
(1)Amala Cancer Research Centre, Amala Nagar, Kerala Trichur 680 553, India.

Methanolic extract (75%) of Terminalia chebula, Terminalia belerica, Emblica 
officinalis and their combination named 'Triphala' (equal proportion of above 
three plant extracts) are being used extensively in Indian system of medicine. 
They were found to inhibit lipid peroxide formation and to scavenge hydroxyl and 
superoxide radicals in vitro. The concentration of plant extracts that inhibited 
50% of lipid peroxidation induced with Fe(2+)/ascorbate were food to be 85.5, 
27, 74 and 69 micro g/ml, respectively. The concentration needed for the 
inhibition of hydoxyl radical scavenging were 165, 71, 155.5 and 151 micro g/ml, 
and that for superoxide scavenging activity were found to be 20.5, 40.5, 6.5 and 
12.5 micro g/ml, respectively. Oral administration of the extracts (100 mg/kg 
body weight) reduced the blood sugar level in normal and in alloxan (120 mg/kg) 
diabetic rats significantly within 4 h. Continued, daily administration of the 
drug produced a sustained effect.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(02)00034-x
PMID: 12065146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Integr Med Res. 2018 Jun;7(2):176-183. doi: 10.1016/j.imr.2018.03.004. Epub 2018 
Mar 27.

In vitro and in vivo antidiabetic effect of extracts of Melia azedarach, 
Zanthoxylum alatum, and Tanacetum nubigenum.

Khan MF(1), Rawat AK(2), Khatoon S(3), Hussain MK(4), Mishra A(2), Negi DS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Era's Lucknow Medical College & Hospital, Era 
University, Lucknow, India.
(2)Biochemistry Division, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, CSIR, Lucknow, 
India.
(3)Department of Botany, D. N. (P.G.) College, Meerut, India.
(4)Department of Chemistry Govt. Raza Post Graduate College, Rampur, India.
(5)Department of Chemistry, HNB Garhwal University, Srinagar, India.

BACKGROUND: To investigate the antidiabetic effect of Himalayan Medicinal plants 
from India viz. Melia azedarach (Family: Meliaceae), Zanthoxylum alatum (Family: 
Rutaceae), Tanacetum nubigenum (Family: Asteraceae) using in-vitro as well as 
in-vivo approaches.
METHODS: Their effects were examined on stimulation of glucose uptake by C2C12 
cultured cell line, inhibitory effect on human recombinant Protein tyrosine 
phosphatase-1B (PTP-1B) and followed by the hypoglycaemic activity of extracts 
in Streptozotocin (STZ) induced diabetic rats.
RESULTS: All prepared extracts had been found to enrich with polyphenolic, 
flavonoids, terpenoids, anthraquinones and saponins type of compounds. n-Butanol 
fraction of Zanthoxylum alatum showed maximum PTP-1B inhibition (61.9%) whereas 
ethanol extract of Tanacetum nubigenum showed strong stimulation of glucose 
uptake (+61.2%) in C2Cl2 myotubes. In STZ induced Sprague-Dawley rats, 
significant decrease in blood glucose level was observed in ethanol extract of 
Melia azaderach treated group as 14.8% (p < 0.01) whereas in the ethanol extract 
of Tanacetum nubigenum treated group, it was observed as 15.5% (p < 0.01) 
compare to metformin which showed 26.8% (p < 0.01) lowering of blood glucose in 
the same time duration of 5 h study.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated that these plants have a significant 
therapeutic value in type-2-diabetes mellitus and related complications thus 
supporting their traditional uses in Indian traditional system of medicine.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imr.2018.03.004
PMCID: PMC6026355
PMID: 29984178


76. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 2013 Jul;3(7):505-14. doi: 
10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60105-7.

Neem (Azadirachta indica): prehistory to contemporary medicinal uses to 
humankind.

Kumar VS(1), Navaratnam V.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Drug Research, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Penang, Malaysia. 
natu_sea@hotmail.com

The divine tree neem (Azadirachta indica) is mainly cultivated in the Indian 
subcontinent. Neem has been used extensively by humankind to treat various 
ailments before the availability of written records which recorded the beginning 
of history. The world health organization estimates that 80% of the population 
living in the developing countries relies exclusively on traditional medicine 
for their primary health care. More than half of the world's population still 
relies entirely on plants for medicines, and plants supply the active 
ingredients of most traditional medical products. The review shows the neem has 
been used by humankind to treat various ailments from prehistory to 
contemporary.

DOI: 10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60105-7
PMCID: PMC3695574
PMID: 23835719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: We declare that 
we have no conflict of interest.


77. Phytother Res. 2016 Jul;30(7):1119-27. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5614. Epub 2016 Mar 28.

Erectogenic and Aphrodisiac Property of Moringa oleifera: Involvement of Soluble 
Epoxide Hydrolase Enzyme.

Goswami SK(1), Inamdar MN(1), Dethe SM(2), Gururaj GM(2), Jamwal R(2), Bhaskar 
A(2), Mundkinajeddu D(2), Agarwal A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Al-Ameen College of Pharmacy, Bangalore, 560027, 
India.
(2)R&D Centre, Natural Remedies Pvt. Ltd., Plot No. 5B, Veerasandra Industrial 
Area, Bangalore, 560100, India.

Soluble epoxide hydrolase (sEH) inhibitors have been reported to improve penile 
erection; therefore, sEH could be useful for management of erectile dysfunction. 
Methanolic and aqueous extracts of 30 Indian medicinal plants were screened for 
their sEH inhibition potential. Fifteen extracts showed >50% inhibition when 
screened at 50 µg/mL in sEH inhibition assay. Methanolic extract of Moringa 
oleifera Lam. (Moringaceae) seeds (MEMO) was most potent with IC50 
1.7 ± 0.1 µg/mL and was selected for in vitro studies on isolated rat corpus 
cavernosum smooth muscle and in vivo sexual behaviour studies on healthy and 
diabetic rats. Rats were divided into five groups, each containing six animals 
and treated orally with either water, vehicle (1% Tween-20), MEMO (45 and 
90 mg/kg/day for 21 days), and standard drug, sildenafil (5 mg/kg/day for 
7 days). An equal number of female rats were used, and the effect of MEMO and 
sildenafil was compared with that of vehicle. MEMO significantly relaxed 
isolated rat corpus cavernosum smooth muscle at 0.1-100 µg/mL in vitro and 
significantly increased (p < 0.05) sexual activity, intracavernous pressure/mean 
arterial pressure in normal and diabetic rats. The increase in erectile function 
of rats by MEMO could be because of its sEH inhibitory activity. Copyright © 
2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.5614
PMID: 27020843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2007 Winter;120(1-3):148-62. doi: 
10.1007/s12011-007-8022-6.

Availability of essential elements in nutrient supplements used as antidiabetic 
herbal formulations.

Choudhury RP(1), Reddy AV, Garg AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 247 667, 
India.

Five brands of antidiabetic herbal formulations as tablets, Diabetex, Divya 
Madhu Nashini, Jambrushila, Diabeticin, and Madhumeh Nashini, from different 
pharmacies were analyzed for six minor (Na, K, Ca, Cl, Mg, and P) and 20 trace 
(As, Ba, Br, Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Cu, Fe, Hg, La, Mn, Rb, Sb, Sc, Se, Sm, Th, V, and 
Zn) elements by thermal neutron irradiation followed by high-resolution gamma 
ray spectrometry. Further Ni, Cd, and Pb were determined by atomic absorption 
spectrophotometry. Most elements vary in a narrow range by a factor of 2-4 while 
a few others vary in a wide range, e.g., Na (0.05-0.67 mg/g), Mn (26.7-250 
microg/g), and V (0.26-2.50 microg/g). All the five brands contain K, Cl, Mg, P, 
and Ca as minor constituents along with mean trace amounts of Cr (2.11 +/- 0.67 
microg/g), Cu (15.7 +/- 7.11 microg/g), Fe (459 +/- 171 microg/g), Mn (143 +/- 
23 microg/g), Se (238 +/- 112 ng/g), and V (0.99 +/- 0.93 microg/g). Jambrushila 
is enriched in Na, Ca, Mg, Cl, Fe, Cu, Se, and Zn, essential nutrients 
responsible for curing diabetes. Dietary intake of Mn, Fe, and Cu are greater 
than 10% of the recommended dietary allowance, whereas that for Zn and Se is 
less than 2%. Mean contents of toxic elements (As, Cd, Hg, and Pb) were found 
below permissible limits except in Jambrushila. Cr and Zn were inversely 
correlated with r = -0.81, whereas Rb and Cs exhibit linear correlation (r = 
0.93) in five brands. C, H, N analysis showed C approximately 55%, H 
approximately 12%, and N approximately 2% with a total of approximately 70% 
organic matter. However, thermal decomposition studies at 700 degrees C suggest 
less than 5% nonvolatile metal oxides. Herbal formulations contain minor and 
trace elements in bioavailable forms that favorably influence glucose tolerance 
and possibly increase the body's ability to ameliorate development of diabetes.

DOI: 10.1007/s12011-007-8022-6
PMID: 17916967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2009 Jun;87(6):479-92. doi: 10.1139/y09-029.

Evaluation of the antidiabetic potential of selected medicinal plant extracts 
from the Canadian boreal forest used to treat symptoms of diabetes: part II.

Harbilas D(1), Martineau LC, Harris CS, Adeyiwola-Spoor DC, Saleem A, Lambert J, 
Caves D, Johns T, Prentki M, Cuerrier A, Arnason JT, Bennett SA, Haddad PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Université de Montréal, Centre-ville Station, 
Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada.

Among the Cree of northern Quebec, the disproportionately high rate of diabetic 
complications is largely due to the cultural inadequacy of modern therapies for 
type 2 diabetes. To establish culturally adapted antidiabetic treatments, our 
team identified several candidate plant species used by the Cree to treat 
symptoms of diabetes. An initial study focused on 8 species and revealed that 
most possess significant in vitro antidiabetic activity. The purpose of the 
present study was to assess a further 9 species identified through the 
ethnobotanical survey. Crude plant extracts were screened for (i) potentiation 
of basal and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by skeletal muscle cells (C2C12) 
and adipocytes (3T3-L1); (ii) potentiation of glucose-stimulated insulin 
secretion by pancreatic beta cells (betaTC); (iii) potentiation of adipogenesis 
in 3T3-L1 cells; (iv) protection against glucose toxicity and glucose 
deprivation in PC12-AC neuronal precursor cells; and (v) diphenylpicrylhydrazyl 
(DPPH) oxygen free radical scavenging. Four species potentiated basal glucose 
uptake in muscle cells or adipocytes, one species being as potent as metformin. 
Adipogenesis was accelerated by 4 species with a potency roughly half that of 
rosiglitazone. Five species protected PC12-AC cells against glucose toxicity and 
4 protected against glucose deprivation. Five species exhibited antioxidant 
activity comparable to ascorbic acid. However, no species increased insulin 
secretion. The present study revealed that Gaultheria hispidula, Rhododendron 
tomentosum, and Vaccinium vitis-idaea exhibit a promising profile of 
antidiabetic potential and are good candidates for more in-depth evaluation.

DOI: 10.1139/y09-029
PMID: 19526043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Ethnopharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;137(1):289-97. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.05.022. Epub 
2011 May 27.

Herbal drug patenting in India: IP potential.

Sahoo N(1), Manchikanti P, Dey SH.

Author information:
(1)Rajiv Gandhi School of Intellectual Property Law, IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur 
721302, West Bengal, India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Herbal drugs are gaining worldwide prominence 
due to their distinct advantages. Developing countries have started exploring 
the ethnopharmacological approach of drug discovery and have begun to file 
patents on herbal drugs. The expansion of R&D in Indian herbal research 
organizations and presence of manufacturing units at non-Indian sites is an 
indication of the capability to develop new products and processes. The present 
study attempts to identify innovations in the Indian herbal drug sector by 
analyzing the patenting trends in India, US and EU.
METHODOLOGY: Based on key word and IPC based search at the IPO, USPTO, Esp@cenet 
and WIPO databases, patent applications and grant in herbal drugs by Indian 
applicants/assignees was collected for the last ten years (from 1st January 2001 
to 31st October 2010). From this collection patents related to human therapeutic 
use only were selected. Analysis was performed to identify filing trends, major 
applicants/assignees, disease area and major plant species used for various 
treatments.
RESULT: There is a gradual increase in patent filing through the years. In 
India, individual inventors have maximum applications and grants. CSIR, among 
research organizations and Hindustan Unilever, Avesthagen, Piramal Life Science, 
Sahajanand Biotech and Indus Biotech among the companies have the maximum 
granted patents in India, US and EU respectively. Diabetes, cancer and 
inflammatory disorders are the major areas for patenting in India and abroad. 
Recent patents are on new herbal formulations for treatment of AIDS, hepatitis, 
skin disorders and gastrointestinal disorders.
CONCLUSION: A majority of the herbal patents applications and grants in India 
are with individual inventors. Claim analysis indicates that these patents 
include novel multi-herb compositions with synergistic action. Indian research 
organizations are more active than companies in filing for patents. CSIR has 
maximum numbers of applications not only in India but also in the US and EU. 
Patents by research organizations and herbal companies are on development of new 
processes for active compound isolation and standardization of such components 
in addition to new compositions for therapeutic use. Pharmaceutical companies 
such as Ranbaxy, Lupin and Panacea Biotec are increasingly patenting on herbal 
drugs. There is increased patenting activity related to diabetes, cancer, 
cardiovascular diseases, asthma and arthritis in India and abroad.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2011.05.022
PMID: 21640810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2000 Sep;51(5):409-14. doi: 10.1080/096374800427019.

Development of food products based on millets, legumes and fenugreek seeds and 
their suitability in the diabetic diet.

Pathak P(1), Srivastava S, Grover S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, College of Home Science, GB Pant 
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantnagar, Nagar, India.

A multitude of investigations have demonstrated the beneficial hypoglycemic 
effect of millets, fenugreek seeds and legumes in diabetic subjects. However, 
the bitter taste of fenugreek seeds and coarse nature of millets have been 
limitations in using them in daily dietaries. Moreover, as of today, the 
availability of special foods for diabetics in the Indian market is negligible. 
The millets, fenugreek seeds and legumes in judicious combination, after 
suitable processing, were used to formulate three nutritious food 
products--dhokla (leavened steamed cake), uppuma (kedgeree) and laddu (sweet 
balls), which are popular traditional snack foods in India. Evaluation of these 
food products for glycemic response in five normal and five diabetic subjects 
showed hypoglycemic effects in terms of glycemic-index (GI). The highest GI was 
observed for dhokla (34.96) followed by laddu (23.52) and uppuma (17.60) in 
normal subjects. All three food products differed significantly from each other 
in GI. Comparison of GI of all three food products in normal subjects with 
diabetes did not show significant differences (P approximately 0.05). The food 
products were well tolerated and acceptable to the subjects. These food products 
may have an important role in dietary management for diabetic people and may 
cater for their needs on a large scale if commercialized.

DOI: 10.1080/096374800427019
PMID: 11103307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nat Prod Res. 2016;30(4):493-6. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2015.1024117. Epub 2015 
Mar 27.

Advanced glycation end-products inhibitors isolated from Schisandra grandiflora.

Poornima B(1), Kumar DA(2), Siva B(1), Venkanna A(1), Vadaparthi PR(1), Kumar 
K(1), Tiwari AK(2), Babu KS(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Natural Products Chemistry, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical 
Technology , Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500 007 , India.
(2)b Division of Medicinal Chemistry & Pharmacology, CSIR-Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology , Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500 007 , India.

Free radicals scavenging and advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) inhibitory 
potentials in crude chloroform extract of Schisandra grandiflora were evaluated. 
Bioassay-guided isolation of the chloroform extract led to the identification of 
24 compounds. Among the isolates, ( ± ) gomisin M1, arisantetralone C and D, 
macelignan, saurulignan B and SZ-MO displayed potent-free radical scavenging as 
well as AGEs inhibitory potentials. This is the first report identifying the 
presence of AGEs inhibitory activity and assigning AGEs inhibitory activity to 
these compounds. Therefore, our research finds new application of traditional 
medicinal plant S. grandiflora having capacity to reduce formation and 
accumulation of AGEs in diabetes.

DOI: 10.1080/14786419.2015.1024117
PMID: 25812677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Pharmacognosy Res. 2015 Jun;7(Suppl 1):S57-62. doi: 10.4103/0974-8490.157997.

Evaluation of antioxidant, antibacterial, and antidiabetic potential of two 
traditional medicinal plants of India: Swertia cordata and Swertia chirayita.

Roy P(1), Abdulsalam FI(1), Pandey DK(1), Bhattacharjee A(2), Eruvaram NR(1), 
Malik T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Lovely School of Biotechnology and Biosciences, 
Lovely Professional University Jalandhar, Phagwara, Punjab, India.
(2)Department of Physiology, International Medical School, Management and 
Science University, Shah Alam, Selangor, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Swertia cordata and Swertia chirayita are temperate Himalayan 
medicinal plants used as potent herbal drugs in Indian traditional systems of 
medicine (Ayurvedic, Unani and Siddha).
OBJECTIVE: Assessment of Antioxidant, antibacterial, and antidiabetic potential 
of Swertia cordata and Swertia chirayita.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Phytochemicals of methanolic and aqueous extracts of the 
two Swertia species were analyzed. The antioxidant potential of all the extracts 
was assessed by measuring total phenolic content, total flavonoid content and 
free radical scavenging potential was assessed by 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrilhydrazyl 
(DPPH) assay, antibacterial activity was assessed against various pathogenic and 
nonpathogenic bacteria in vitro by Kirby-Bauer agar well diffusion method and 
antidiabetic activity was assessed by α-amylase inhibition.
RESULTS: Methanolic leaf extracts of both the species of Swertia contain 
significant antibacterial as well as anti-diabetic potential, whereas methanolic 
root extracts of both species were found to have potential antioxidant activity. 
However, Swertia chirayita showed better activities than Swertia cordata 
although both species have good reputation in traditional Indian medicine.
CONCLUSION: Both the species are having high medicinal potential in terms of 
their antioxidant, antibacterial and antidiabetic activities. Studies are 
required to further elucidate antioxidant, anti-diabetic and antibacterial 
potentials using various in-vitro, in-vivo biochemical and molecular biology 
techniques.

DOI: 10.4103/0974-8490.157997
PMCID: PMC4466770
PMID: 26109789

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.


84. Pharmacogn Mag. 2017 Oct;13(Suppl 3):S481-S483. doi: 10.4103/pm.pm_420_16. Epub 
2017 Oct 11.

Chromosomal Fragmentation: A Possible Marker for the Selection of High Gymnemic 
Acid Yielding Accessions of Gymnema sylvestre R. Br.

Verma AK(1), Dhawan SS(2).

Author information:
(1)Central Botanical Laboratory, Botanical Survey of India, AJC Bose Indian 
Botanic Garden, Howrah, West Bengal, India.
(2)Plant Biotechnology Division, CSIR - Central Institute of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

BACKGROUND: Gymnema sylvestre R. Br. a member of family Asclepiadaceae as 
mentioned in Indian Pharmacopoeia popular among the researchers because of 
stimulatory effect of its phytoconstituent on pancreatic cells and potential to 
treat Type I and II type of diabetes.
OBJECTIVES: Development of cost-effective marker system for the selection of 
high gymnemic acid yielding accessions of G. sylvestre.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Presoaked seeds of Brassica campestris treated with 
different dilutions of gymnemagenin and 10% leaf extract of twenty different 
accessions of G. sylvestre. Root tips of germinated seeds were fixed, and 
chromosomal studies were made by root tip bioassay method.
RESULTS: Exposure of seeds to treatment solutions promotes various types of 
chromosomal anomalies in root meristem, and surprisingly, direct correlation 
between the percentage of chromosomal fragmentation and the percentage of 
gymnemic acid shared by treatment solution were observed.
CONCLUSION: Later finding may be explored for the development of a novel 
methodology or marker system for the selection of high active principle yielding 
accessions of G. sylvestre.
SUMMARY: An experiment was carried out using root tip bioassay method for the 
study of effect of different dilutions of standard gymnemic acid and 10% leaf 
extract of twenty different accessions of Gymnema sylvestre on root tip meristem 
of Brassica campestris. Various types of chromosomal anomalies were observed. Of 
which, percentage of chromosomal fragmentation was showed a direct (∞) 
relationship with the percentage of gymnemic acid shared by treatment solution. 
This interesting result after more and more exploration and revalidation could 
be utilized for the development of a novel methodology for the selection of high 
active principle yielding accessions of G. sylvestre. Abbreviations used: MI: 
Mitotic index; CP: Condensed prophase; CM: Clumped metaphase; MC: Metaphase 
cleft; FR: Fragmentation; AP: Anaphase with persistent nucleolous; LA: Laggard, 
BR: Bridge; BI: Bi-nucleated cell; DA: Disturbed anaphasic polarity.

DOI: 10.4103/pm.pm_420_16
PMCID: PMC5669085
PMID: 29142402

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


85. J Food Sci Technol. 2015 Apr;52(4):1911-23. doi: 10.1007/s13197-013-1211-8. Epub 
2013 Nov 26.

Aqueous extract of some indigenous medicinal plants inhibits glycation at 
multiple stages and protects erythrocytes from oxidative damage-an in vitro 
study.

Tupe RS(1), Sankhe NM(1), Shaikh SA(1), Phatak DV(1), Parikh JU(1), Khaire 
AA(1), Kemse NG(1).

Author information:
(1)Biochemical Sciences Division, Rajiv Gandhi Institute of IT and 
Biotechnology, Bharati Vidyapeeth University, Pune, 411046 India.

Azadirachta indica, Emblica officinalis, Syzygium cumini and Terminalia 
bellirica are common in Indian system of traditional medicine for the prevention 
of diabetes and its complications. The aim of the present study was to 
comprehensively and comparatively investigate the antiglycation potential of 
these plant extracts at multiple stages and their possible protective effect 
against glycated albumin mediated toxicity to erythrocytes. Antiglycation 
activities of these plant extracts was measured by co-incubation of plant 
extract with bovine serum albumin-fructose glycation model. The multistage 
glycation markers- fructosamines (early stage), protein carbonyls (intermediate 
stage) and AGEs (late stage) are investigated along with measurement of thiols 
and β aggregation of albumin using amyloid-specific dyes-Congo red and Th T. 
Protection of erythrocytes from glycated albumin induced toxicity by these plant 
extracts was assessed by measuring erythrocytes hemolysis, lipid peroxidation, 
reduced glutathione and intracellular antioxidant capacity. Total phenolics, 
reducing power and antioxidant activities of the plant extracts were also 
measured. In vitro glycation assays showed that plant extracts exerted site 
specific inhibitory effects at multiple stages, with T. bellirica showing 
maximum attenuation. In erythrocytes, along with the retardation of glycated 
albumin induced hemolysis and lipid-peroxidation, T. bellirica considerably 
maintained cellular antioxidant potential. Significant positive correlations 
were observed between erythrocyte protection parameters with total phenolics. 
These plant extracts especially T. bellirica prevents glycation induced albumin 
modifications and subsequent toxicity to erythrocytes which might offer 
additional protection against diabetic vascular complications.

DOI: 10.1007/s13197-013-1211-8
PMCID: PMC4375206
PMID: 25829572


86. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 20;277(38):34933-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M204672200. Epub 
2002 Jul 12.

Epigallocatechin gallate, a constituent of green tea, represses hepatic glucose 
production.

Waltner-Law ME(1), Wang XL, Law BK, Hall RK, Nawano M, Granner DK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.

Herbs have been used for medicinal purposes, including the treatment of 
diabetes, for centuries. Plants containing flavonoids are used to treat diabetes 
in Indian medicine and the green tea flavonoid, epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), 
is reported to have glucose-lowering effects in animals. We show here that the 
regulation of hepatic glucose production is decreased by EGCG. Furthermore, like 
insulin, EGCG increases tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and 
insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), and it reduces phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase gene expression in a phosphoinositide 3-kinase-dependent manner. 
EGCG also mimics insulin by increasing phosphoinositide 3-kinase, 
mitogen-activated protein kinase, and p70(s6k) activity. EGCG differs from 
insulin, however, in that it affects several insulin-activated kinases with 
slower kinetics. Furthermore, EGCG regulates genes that encode gluconeogenic 
enzymes and protein-tyrosine phosphorylation by modulating the redox state of 
the cell. These results demonstrate that changes in the redox state may have 
beneficial effects for the treatment of diabetes and suggest a potential role 
for EGCG, or derivatives, as an antidiabetic agent.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M204672200
PMID: 12118006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Indian J Exp Biol. 2016 Jul;54(7):477-481.

A rapid and efficient protocol for in vitro multiplication of genetically 
uniform Stevia rebaudiana (Bertoni).

Khan A, Jayanthi M, Gantasala NP, Bhooshan N, Rao U.

Stevia rebaudiana (Bertoni), commonly called candy leaf or sweet leaf, endemic 
to South America, is an important medicinal plant. As a source of low calorie 
natural sweetener 'stevoside', it is used in obesity, diabetes, treatment of 
heartburn and tooth decay, and also serves as a food supplement. Large scale 
commercial propagation of S. rebaudiana demands a suitable protocol. Here, we 
propose an improved protocol for in vitro multiplication of S. rebaudiana from 
nodal explants. In this protocol, the effect of laboratory grade urea on 
multiple shoot induction from nodal explants was studied. The nodal explants 
were initially cultured on Murashige and Skoog (MS) basal media for 2 weeks 
which facilitated the axillary bud break. Further, culturing of these explants 
on MS medium fortified with 6 benzyl amninopurine (BAP) (2 mg/L) and Naphthalene 
acetic acid (NAA) (1 mg/L) with and .without urea (5 mg/L) for a period of 40 
days revealed maximum shoot production of 44.56 from a single nodal explant in 
media supplemented with urea as compared to 22.44 without urea. The differences 
in the number of shoots produced were significant and these shoots readily 
rooted in MS media with NAA (4 mg/L). Primary and secondary hardening was 
successful in these plants. There were no visible morphological abnormalities 
observed in the micropropagated plantlets. Genetic analysis from random samples 
also revealed that these plants are genetically uniform. The advantage of the 
present protocol is that the complete process of multiple shoot induction, 
rooting and hardening could be completed within a period of 6 months as compared 
to the existing protocols.

PMID: 29466627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Am Coll Nutr. 1990 Dec;9(6):573-7. doi: 10.1080/07315724.1990.10720411.

Glycemic index of traditional Indian carbohydrate foods.

Mani UV(1), Bhatt S, Mehta NC, Pradhan SN, Shah V, Mani I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, Medical College, MS University of Baroda, 
Gujarat State, India.

The glycemic index (GI) was determined in 36 non-insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus patients who were fed 50 g carbohydrate portions of six Indian 
conventional foods, including rice, a combination of rice-legume (Bengalgram, 
peas, and greengram), and a combination of rice-dal (greengram dal and redgram 
dal -- dal is dehusked and split legume). In addition to the GI, triglyceride 
(TG) responses of these foods were also determined. A higher GI was obtained for 
rice and for rice with peas; all other combinations yielded lower glycemic 
indices. However, all the foods produced significantly lower blood glucose 
response 2 hours postprandially as compared with blood glucose responses to a 50 
g glucose load for the same group. No significant difference was observed for TG 
responses to the different foods.

DOI: 10.1080/07315724.1990.10720411
PMID: 2273190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Pharmacogn Mag. 2015 Oct;11(Suppl 4):S522-32. doi: 10.4103/0973-1296.172956.

Chemometrics Optimized Extraction Procedures, Phytosynergistic Blending and in 
vitro Screening of Natural Enzyme Inhibitors Amongst Leaves of Tulsi, Banyan and 
Jamun.

De B(1), Bhandari K(1), Singla RK(2), Katakam P(3), Samanta T(4), Kushwaha 
DK(4), Gundamaraju R(5), Mitra A(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Science and Technology, IIT Kharagpur, India.
(2)Division of Biotechnology, Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, Sector-3, 
Dwarka, New Delhi, India.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Zawia, Az-Zawiya, Libya.
(4)Tea Engineering Research Centre, Department of Agriculture and Food 
Engineering, IIT Kharagpur, India.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Malaya, Kuala Lumpur 50603, Malaysia.

BACKGROUND: Tulsi, Banyan, and Jamun are popular Indian medicinal plants with 
notable hypoglycemic potentials. Now the work reports chemo-profiling of the 
three species with in-vitro screening approach for natural enzyme inhibitors 
(NEIs) against enzymes pathogenic for type 2 diabetes. Further along with the 
chemometrics optimized extraction process technology, phyto-synergistic studies 
of the composite polyherbal blends have also been reported.
OBJECTIVE: Chemometrically optimized extraction procedures, ratios of polyherbal 
composites to achieve phyto-synergistic actions, and in-vitro screening of NEIs 
amongst leaves of Tulsi, Banyan, and Jamun.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The extraction process parameters of the leaves of three 
plant species (Ficus benghalensis, Syzigium cumini and Ocimum sanctum) were 
optimized by rotatable central composite design of chemometrics so as to get 
maximal yield of bio-actives. Phyto-blends of three species were prepared so as 
to achieve synergistic antidiabetic and antioxidant potentials and the ratios 
were optimized by chemometrics. Next, for in vitro screening of natural enzyme 
inhibitors the individual leaf extracts as well as composite blends were 
subjected to assay procedures to see their inhibitory potentials against the 
enzymes pathogenic in type 2 diabetes. The antioxidant potentials were also 
estimated by DPPH radical scavenging, ABTS, FRAP and Dot Blot assay.
RESULTS: Considering response surface methodology studies and from the solutions 
obtained using desirability function, it was found that hydro-ethanolic or 
methanolic solvent ratio of 52.46 ± 1.6 and at a temperature of 20.17 ± 0.6 gave 
an optimum yield of polyphenols with minimal chlorophyll leaching. The species 
also showed the presence of glycosides, alkaloids, and saponins. Composites in 
the ratios of 1:1:1 and 1:1:2 gave synergistic effects in terms of polyphenol 
yield and anti-oxidant potentials. All composites (1:1:1, 1:2:1, 2:1:1, 1:1:2) 
showed synergistic anti-oxidant actions. Inhibitory activities against the 
targeted enzymes expressed in terms of IC50 values have shown that 
hydro-ethanolic extracts in all cases whether individual species or composites 
in varying ratios gave higher IC50 values thus showing greater effectivity.
CONCLUSION: Current research provides the state-of-the-art of search of NEIs 
amongst three species by in-vitro assays which can be further utilized for 
bioactivity-guided isolations of such enzyme inhibitors. Further, it reports the 
optimized phyto-blend ratios so as to achieve synergistic anti-oxidative 
actions.
SUMMARY: The current research work focuses on the optimization of the extraction 
process parameters and the ratios of phyto-synergistic blends of the leaves of 
three common medicinal plants viz. banyan, jamun and tulsi by chemometrics. 
Qualitative and quantitative chemo profiling of the extracts were done by 
different phytochemical tests and UV spectrophotometric methods. Enzymes like 
alpha amylase, alpha glucosidase, aldose reductase, dipeptidyl peptidase 4, 
angiotensin converting enzymes are found to be pathogenic in type 2 diabetes. In 
vitro screening of natural enzyme inhibitors amongst individual extracts and 
composite blends were carried out by different assay procedures and the potency 
expressed in terms of IC50 values. Antioxidant potentials were estimated by DPPH 
radical scavenging, ABTS, FRAP and Dot Blot assay. Hydroalcoholic solvent 
(50:50) gave maximal yield of bio-actives with minimal chlorophyll leaching. 
Hydroethanolic extract of tulsi showed maximal antioxidant effect. Though all 
composites showed synergism, maximal effects were shown by the composite (1:1:2) 
in terms of polyphenol yield, antioxidant effect and inhibitory actions against 
the targeted enzymes. Abbreviations used: DPP4- dipeptidyl peptidase 4; AR- 
aldose reductase; ACE- angiotensin converting enzyme; PPAR-γ- peroxisome 
proliferator activated receptor-γ; NEIs- natural enzyme inhibitors; BE- binding 
energy; GLP-1- Glucagon like peptide -1; ROS- Reactive oxygen species; CAT- 
catalase; GSH-Px- glutathione per-oxidase; SOD- superoxide dismutase; pNPG- 
para-nitro phenyl-α-D-gluco-pyranoside solution; DPPH- 
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl; RSM- Response surface methodology; CCD- central 
composite design; DMSO- dimethyl sulfoxide; HHL- hippuryl-L-histidyl-L-leucine; 
GPN-Tos- Gly-Pro p-nitroanilide toluenesulfonate salt; ESC- experimental 
scavenging capacity; TSC- theoretical scavenging capacity; FRAP- Ferric Reducing 
Assay Procedure; ABTS- 2, 2'- azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6 - sulfonic 
acid.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1296.172956
PMCID: PMC4787083
PMID: 27013789


90. Phytother Res. 2013 May;27(5):753-60. doi: 10.1002/ptr.4786. Epub 2012 Jul 24.

In vitro and in vivo inhibitory activities of four Indian medicinal plant 
extracts and their major components on rat aldose reductase and generation of 
advanced glycation endproducts.

Rao AR(1), Veeresham C, Asres K.

Author information:
(1)University College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kakatiya University, Warangal, 
AP, 506009, India.

The polyol enzyme aldose reductase (AR) and advanced glycation endproducts 
(AGEs) play an important role in diabetic complications such as cataracts. The 
purpose of this study was to investigate four standardized plant extracts used 
for the treatment of diabetes and related diseases, and their principal 
components for AR inhibitory activity and to find out their influence in 
diabetic complications. Thus, Boswellia serrata Triana & Planch. (Burseraceae), 
Lagerstroemia speciosa (L.) Pers. (Lythraceae), Ocimum gratissimum (L.) 
(Lamiaceae) and Syzygium cumin (L.) Skeels. (Myrthaceae) and their respective 
major constituents, boswellic acid, corosolic acid, ursolic acid and ellagic 
acid, were studied for their inhibitory activity against rat lens AR, rat kidney 
AR, human recombinant AR and generation of AGEs. In addition, in vivo inhibition 
of lens galactitol accumulation by the major constituents of the plants in 
galactose-fed rat has been studied. The results revealed that all the tested 
extracts and their active ingredients possess significant AR inhibitory actions 
in both in vitro and in vivo assays with urosolic acid showing the most potent 
effect. Furthermore, the study indicates the potential of the studied plants and 
their major constituents as possible protective agents against long-term 
diabetic complications.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.4786
PMID: 22826152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Indian J Med Res. 1989 Aug;90:300-5.

Blood sugar lowering potentiality of selected Cucurbitaceae plants of Indian 
origin.

Chandrasekar B, Mukherjee B, Mukherjee SK.

Using five experimental models, the blood sugar lowering efficacy of eight 
plants of Cucurbitaceae family has been assessed. The ethanolic extract of 
Cucumis sativus Linn, Cucumis melo utilissimum Roxb, Cucumis melo Linn, 
Benincasa hispida Thunb Cogn and Tricosanthes anguina Nees, when administered in 
250 mg/kg dose, orally to rats failed to lower blood sugar or to depress the 
peak value, after glucose load. However, ethanolic extract of Momordica 
charantia Linn plant and Coccinia indica Whit and Arn root significantly lowered 
blood sugar in fasted model and depressed the peak value in glucose loaded 
model. Ethanolic extract of Tricosanthes dioica Roxb plant caused a significant 
lowering of blood sugar in fasted rats and depressed the peak value in glucose 
loaded single and longterm fed groups of rats. The ethanolic extract of the 
aerial part of T. dioica also induced significant depression in the peak values 
in the glucose loaded models.

PMID: 2620957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Indian J Exp Biol. 2010 Feb;48(2):159-64.

2-hydroxy 4-methoxy benzoic acid isolated from roots of Hemidesmus indicus 
ameliorates liver, kidney and pancreas injury due to streptozotocin-induced 
diabetes in rats.

Gayathri M, Kannabiran K.

Protective effect was evaluated in streptozoticin (STZ)-induced diabetes rats. 
2-Hydroxy 4-methoxy benzoic acid (HMBA) was isolated from the roots of 
Hemidesmus indicus and administered (500 microg/kg body weight) orally for 7 
weeks to STZ-induced diabetic and non-diabetic rats to study its effect on 
protein metabolism, serum electrolytes and on liver and kidney lipid peroxides. 
Oral administration of HMBA restored the altered biochemical parameters such as 
urea, uric acid, creatinine, plasma proteins and serum electrolytes to 
near-normal levels. HMBA treatment significantly decreased lipid peroxidation 
and malondialdehyde levels in diabetic liver and kidney. Effect of HMBA was 
equivalent to that of the standard drug, tolbutamide (100 mg/kg body wt). The 
histological changes were also in correlation with the biochemical findings. The 
present study showed that HMBA isolated from H. indicus roots had ameliorative 
effect on liver, kidney and pancreatic injury in STZ-induced diabetic rats.

PMID: 20455325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Pharm Biol. 2016 Sep;54(9):1528-38. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2015.1107107. Epub 
2016 Jan 25.

Beneficial effects of an Andrographis paniculata extract and andrographolide on 
cognitive functions in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Thakur AK(1), Rai G(2), Chatterjee SS(3), Kumar V(1).

Author information:
(1)a Neuropharmacology Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmaceutics , Indian 
Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University) , Varanasi , India ;
(2)b Department of Molecular and Human Genetics , Faculty of Science, Banaras 
Hindu University , Varanasi , India ;
(3)c Stettiner Straße 1 , Karlsruhe , Germany.

Context Andrographolide containing Andrographis paniculata (Burm. F.) Wall. Ex 
Nees (Acanthaceae) extracts is often used for treatments of diabetes and other 
inflammatory disorders commonly accompanying cognitive and other psychiatric 
disorders. Objective To compare the efficacies of a standardised A. paniculata 
extract (AP) and pure andrographolide on cognitive functions, oxidative stress 
and cholinergic function in diabetic rats. Materials and methods 
Streptozotocin-induced diabetic Charles Foster albino rats treated orally with a 
hydro-methanolic A. paniculata leaf extract (50, 100 and 200 mg/kg/day), or with 
pure andrographolide (15, 30 and 60 mg/kg/day) for 10 consecutive days, were 
subjected to Morris water maze test. After the test, acetylcholinesterase, 
superoxide dismutase (SOD), and catalase (CAT) activities and lipid peroxidation 
(LPO) in brain tissues were assessed. Results Acetylcholinesterase activity in 
pre-frontal cortex and hippocampus of diabetic rats was 2.1 and 2.6 times higher 
compared to nondiabetic rats. LPO was 1.6 times higher and decreased SOD (56.3%) 
and CAT (44.9%) activities in pre-frontal cortex of diabetic rats compared to 
nondiabetic rats. AP or andrographolide treatments dose dependently attenuated 
cognitive deficits, reduced acetylcholinesterase activity, oxidative stress, 
improved diabetic hyperglycemia and insulin deficiency. All observed effects of 
AP were quantitatively almost equal to those expected from its analytically 
quantified andrographolide content. Discussion and conclusion Reported 
observations are the very first ones suggesting beneficial effects of 
andrographolide against diabetes associated cognitive deficits, increased 
acetylcholinesterase activity and deteriorated antioxidative status. Efforts to 
exploit A. paniculata extracts enriched in andrographolide as preventive 
measures against such disorders can be warranted.

DOI: 10.3109/13880209.2015.1107107
PMID: 26810454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Ethnopharmacol. 2001 Aug;76(3):233-8. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(01)00246-x.

Traditional Indian anti-diabetic plants attenuate progression of renal damage in 
streptozotocin induced diabetic mice.

Grover JK(1), Vats V, Rathi SS, Dawar R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari 
Nagar, 110049, New Delhi, India

The purpose of the study was to investigate the effects of daily oral feeding 
Momordica charantia (MC) (200 mg/kg), Eugenia jambolana (EJ) (200 mg/kg), Mucuna 
pruriens (MP) (200 mg/kg) and Tinospora cordifolia (TC) extracts for 40 days on 
blood glucose concentrations and kidney functions in streptozotocin 
(STZ)-diabetic rats. Plasma glucose levels, body weight, urine volume and 
urinary albumin levels were monitored on every 10th day over a 40-day period 
while plasma creatinine levels were assessed at the beginning and end of 
experiment. Renal hypertrophy was assessed as the ratio between the kidney 
weight and total body weight. Plasma glucose concentrations in STZ-diabetic mice 
were reduced by the administration of extracts of MC, EJ, TC and MP by 24.4, 
20.84, 7.45 and 9.07%, respectively (P<0.005 for MC, EJ, MP and P<0.05 for TC). 
Urine volume was significantly higher (P<0.005) in diabetic controls and MC, EJ, 
MP and TC treatment prevented polyuria (P<0.001, 0.0001, 0.01 and 0.001, 
respectively). After 10 days of STZ administration urinary albumin levels (UAE) 
were over 6 fold higher in diabetic controls as compared to normal controls. 
Treatment with MC, EJ, MP and TC significantly prevented the rise in UAE levels 
from day 0 to 40 in comparison to diabetic controls (P<0.0001, 0.0001, 0.05, 
0.05, respectively). Renal hypertrophy was significantly higher in diabetic 
controls as compared to non-diabetic controls. MC and EJ partially but 
significantly (P<0.05) prevented renal hypertrophy as compared to diabetic 
controls. TC and MP failed to modify renal hypertrophy. Results indicate that 
these plant drugs should be studied further.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(01)00246-x
PMID: 11448544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Molecules. 2019 Aug 23;24(17):3073. doi: 10.3390/molecules24173073.

Rapid Screening of Forskolin-Type Diterpenoids of Blumea aromatica DC Using 
Ultra-High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Tandem Quadrupole Time-of-Flight 
Mass Spectrometry Based on the Mass Defect Filtering Approach.

He L(1), Zhang Z(2), Yao C(1), Miao J(1), Yan B(1), Wu L(1), Pan L(1), Song 
Z(3), Wei S(4).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Institute for the Research and Development of Endangered 
Medicinal Resources in Southwest China, Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal 
Plants, Nanning 530023, China.
(2)Institute of Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, Southwest University for Nationalities, 
Chengdu 610041, Sichuan Province, China.
(3)National Engineering Institute for the Research and Development of Endangered 
Medicinal Resources in Southwest China, Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal 
Plants, Nanning 530023, China. songzj430@aliyun.com.
(4)National Engineering Institute for the Research and Development of Endangered 
Medicinal Resources in Southwest China, Guangxi Botanical Garden of Medicinal 
Plants, Nanning 530023, China. weishugen2@163.com.

The discovery of new active compounds of natural products tends to be 
increasingly more challenging due to chemical complexity and unpredictable 
matrices. Forskolin is an active natural labdane-type diterpenoid ingredient 
widely used worldwide for the treatment of glaucoma, heart failure, 
hypertension, diabetes, and asthma, and is expected to be a promising 
anticancer, anti-inflammation, and anti-HIV agent. In recent years, demand for 
forskolin in the medicine market has increased dramatically. However, natural 
forskolin originates exclusively from traditional Indian herb medicine Coleus 
forskohlii (Willd.) Briq. In a previous study, we isolated a series of 
diterpenoids including an 8,13-epoxy-14ene labdane carbon skeleton from Blumea 
aromatica DC. In order to identify alternative plant resources, a novel and 
effective strategy was proposed for the screening of potential forskolin-type 
diterpenoids (FSKD) compounds obtained from B. aromatica, using the mass defect 
filtering (MDF) strategy via ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography tandem 
quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-QTOF/MS) approach. Within a 
narrow, well-defined mass defect range, the strategy developed could 
significantly improve the detection efficiency of selected FSKD compounds by 
filtering out certain major or moderate interference compounds. Additionally, 
the MS/MS cleavage behavior and the characteristic diagnostic ions of the FSKD 
compounds were proposed to be used in aiding structural identification of the 
filtration compounds. As a result, a total of 38 FSKD of B. aromatica were 
filtered out and tentatively identified. To the best of our knowledge, it was 
the first time that these forskolin-type diterpenoids were identified in B. 
aromatica, which significantly expands our understanding of the chemical 
constituents of Blumea species, and allows B. aromatica to be used as a 
potential alternative plant resource that contains these forskolin-type active 
compounds. The strategy proposed was proven efficient and reliable for the 
discovery of novel compounds of herbal extracts.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules24173073
PMCID: PMC6749246
PMID: 31450838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


96. West Indian Med J. 2012 Dec;61(9):861-4. doi: 10.7727/wimj.2011.223.

The antimicrobial screening of a Barbadian medicinal plant with indications for 
use in the treatment of diabetic wound infections.

Carrington S(1), Cohall DH, Gossell-Williams M, Lindo JF.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medical Sciences, The University of the West Indies, Cave Hill, 
Barbados.

OBJECTIVE: Diabetes mellitus is a chronic non-communicable disease with high 
prevalence in the North American and Caribbean region. Diabetic Foot Syndrome 
which is an associated complication can lead to the development of wounds and 
ulcers which can become infected. Justicia secunda, a plant known locally in 
Barbados as Bloodroot used in folklore for wound healing, was selected to test 
its ability to aid diabetic wound healing by antimicrobial activity. It was 
therefore tested against the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 25923, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853, and Enterococcus feacalis (clincal strain) 
which are commonly found in diabetic wounds.
METHODS: The plant was collected by local users. Methanol and acetone extracts 
of the plant were prepared with use of soxhlet extraction. The antimicrobial 
activity was assessed with the use of a modified Kirby-Baurer method. 
Concentrations of 200 mg/ml, 100 mg/ml, 10 mg/ml, and 1 mg/ml of the extract 
were used, with a standard ciprofloxacin 5 microg positive control, and a 5% 
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solution negative control.
RESULTS: The J secunda methanol and acetone extracts with an extraction yield of 
15.3% and 0.75%, respectively yielded no activity within the concentration range 
against the three strains of bacteria tested. In comparison with the positive 
control, relative inhibition zone diameter (RIZD) values of 0% resulted for both 
the negative control and the extracts, with the positive control having a value 
of 100%.
CONCLUSION: The in vitro screen of the extracts prepared from J secunda, yielded 
no antimicrobial activity against the three strains of bacteria tested and 
therefore does not support the folklore claims by this mechanism of action.

DOI: 10.7727/wimj.2011.223
PMID: 24020224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Pharm Biol. 2013 Oct;51(10):1304-10. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2013.789917. Epub 
2013 Jul 15.

Beneficial effects of Brassica juncea on cognitive functions in rats.

Thakur AK(1), Chatterjee SS, Kumar V.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), 
Varanasi, India.

CONTEXT. Brassica juncea (BJ; Linnaeus) Czern & Coss (Brassicaceae), commonly 
known as Indian mustard, are enriched in redox-active polyphenols with 
antidiabetic activities. Diverse other health benefits of this edible plant have 
been described in classical Ayurvedic texts.
OBJECTIVE: The reported experiments were designed to assess therapeutic 
potential of a methanol extract of BJ leaves for treatment of cognitive 
disorders associated with diabetes or caused by central cholinergic 
dysfunctions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Elevated plus-maze and active- and passive-avoidance 
tests were used to assess anti-amnesic potentials of BJ (100, 200 and 400 
mg/kg/day, p.o., for 10 days) in alloxan diabetic or scopolamine-challenged 
rats. Treatment effects on brain acetylcholinesterase (AChE), superoxide 
dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) activities were quantified in behavioral 
tested animals.
RESULTS: Anti-amnesic efficacy of all three tested BJ doses against 
scopolamine-induced amnesia was almost equal in all behavioral tests. Such 
efficacy of the extract in diabetic rats was increased always with its 
increasing doses. All treatments of BJ dose dependently decreased the elevated 
level of AChE, and significantly increased the SOD and CAT levels in brain 
homogenates of scopolamine-challenged and diabetic rats. Minimal effective oral 
daily doses of BJ in all tests were 100 mg/kg/day for 10 consecutive days.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Our observation indicates that BJ could be a 
therapeutic option for treatment of cognitive disorders associated with 
diabetes, or caused by cholinergic deficit and brain oxidative status. They also 
indicate that the bioactive constituents or mode of actions involved in observed 
effects of the extract in scopolamine-challenged or diabetic rats are most 
probably not the same.

DOI: 10.3109/13880209.2013.789917
PMID: 23848339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Chem Biol Interact. 2009 Nov 10;182(1):67-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2009.08.012. 
Epub 2009 Aug 18.

Antidiabetic and antilipidemic effect of eremanthin from Costus speciosus 
(Koen.)Sm., in STZ-induced diabetic rats.

Eliza J(1), Daisy P, Ignacimuthu S, Duraipandiyan V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Holy Cross College, Trichy 620002, Tamil Nadu, 
India.

The increasing prevalence of diabetes mellitus worldwide is an issue of major 
socio-economic concern. Diabetes mellitus is a complex and a multifarious group 
of disorders that disturbs the metabolism of carbohydrates, fat and protein. 
Medicinal plants play an important role in the management of diabetes mellitus 
especially in developing countries. Costus speciosus is widely used in Indian 
medicine to treat various diseases. Eremanthin was isolated from C. speciosus. 
The structure was identified using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) 
analysis. Eremanthin was administered to streptozotocin (STZ) (50mg/kg bw) 
induced diabetic male Wistar rats at different doses (5, 10, 20mg/kg bw) for 60 
days. Plasma glucose level was significantly (p<0.05) reduced in a dose 
dependent manner when compared to the control. In addition, oral administration 
of eremanthin (20mg/kg bw) significantly decreased glycosylated hemoglobin 
(HbA(1c)), serum total cholesterol, triglyceride, LDL-cholesterol and at the 
same time markedly increased plasma insulin, tissue glycogen, HDL-cholesterol 
and serum protein. Eremanthin also restored the altered plasma enzyme (aspartate 
aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, alkaline 
phosphatase and acid phosphatase) levels to near normal. Results of this 
experimental study indicated that eremanthin possessed hypoglycemic and 
hypolipidemic activities and hence it could be used as a drug for treating 
diabetes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cbi.2009.08.012
PMID: 19695236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Ethnopharmacol. 2000 Apr;70(1):9-15. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(99)00136-1.

Hypoglycaemic and other related actions of Tinospora cordifolia roots in 
alloxan-induced diabetic rats.

Stanely P(1), Prince M, Menon VP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar, India.

Tinospora cordifolia is widely used in Indian Ayurvedic medicine for treating 
diabetes mellitus. Oral administration of an aqueous T. cordifolia root extract 
(TCREt) to alloxan diabetic rats caused a significant reduction in blood glucose 
and brain lipids. The extract caused an increase in body weight, total 
haemoglobin and hepatic hexokinase. The root extract also lowers hepatic 
glucose-6-phosphatase and serum acid phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase, and 
lactate dehydrogenase in diabetic rats. Thus TCREt has hypoglycaemic and 
hypolipidaemic effect.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(99)00136-1
PMID: 10720784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Jun 25;123(3):392-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.03.036. Epub 
2009 Apr 5.

Effect of Moringa oleifera Lam. leaves aqueous extract therapy on hyperglycemic 
rats.

Jaiswal D(1), Kumar Rai P, Kumar A, Mehta S, Watal G.

Author information:
(1)Alternative Therapeutics Unit, Drug Development Division, Medicinal Research 
Lab, Department of Chemistry, University of Allahabad, Allahabad, U.P. 211002, 
India.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: In Indian traditional system of medicine, 
Moringa oleifera Lam. Syn. Moringa pterygosperma Gaerth (Moringaceae) is 
commonly used as healing herb to treat diabetes.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The purpose of the present study was to assess the effect of 
M. oleifera leaves aqueous extract therapy on glycemic control, haemoglobin, 
total protein, urine sugar, urine protein and body weight.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Variable doses of 100, 200 and 300 mg kg(-1) of aqueous 
extract were administered orally by gavage for evaluating their hypoglycemic and 
antidiabetic effects on fasting blood glucose (FBG), oral glucose tolerance test 
(OGTT) and post prandial glucose (PPG) of normal and streptozotocin (STZ) 
induced sub, mild and severely diabetic rats.
RESULTS: The dose of 200 mg kg(-1) decreases blood glucose level (BGL) of normal 
animals by 26.7 and 29.9% during FBG and OGTT studies respectively. In sub and 
mild diabetic animals the same dose produced a maximum fall of 31.1 and 32.8% 
respectively, during OGTT. In case of severely diabetic animals FBG and PPG 
levels were reduced by 69.2 and 51.2% whereas, total protein, body weight and 
haemoglobin were increased by 11.3, 10.5 and 10.9% respectively after 21 days of 
treatment. Significant reduction was found in urine sugar and urine protein 
levels from +4 and +2 to nil and trace, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The study validates scientifically the widely claimed use of M. 
oleifera as an ethnomedicine to treat diabetes mellitus.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.03.036
PMID: 19501271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Indian Med Assoc. 1994 Apr;92(4):115-7.

Clinical evaluation of a herbal antidiabetic product.

Sadhukhan B(1), Roychowdhury U, Banerjee P, Sen S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, IPGME & R and SSKM Hospital, 
Calcutta.

Sixty-seven diabetic patients and 12 normal subjects were selected for a 
clinical study with an indigenous herbal product. The study consisted of 2 
phases. In phase 1 study out of 25 diabetics (both insulin dependent and 
non-insulin dependent) only those in the age group of 41-50 years ie, 11 cases 
showed lowering of mean high blood sugar level in all samples from 1/2 an-hour 
to 2 hours with the test drug containing guar gum, methi, tundika and mesha 
shringi. But in phase 2 study there was lowering of blood sugar level with the 
test drug and with 2 of its constituents ie, guar gum and methi when used 
separately in 42 non-insulin dependent diabetics. While there was some blood 
sugar level lowering effect with guar gum and methi when used separately in 12 
normal subjects in phase 2 study, but that was not the same observed with the 
test drug. The results of this study indicate the efficacy of the product as an 
adjuvant.

PMID: 8083548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2013 Oct 20;13:273. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-273.

Umbelliferone β-D-galactopyranoside from Aegle marmelos (L.) corr. an 
ethnomedicinal plant with antidiabetic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidative 
activity.

Kumar V(1), Ahmed D, Verma A, Anwar F, Ali M, Mujeeb M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, Sam 
Higginbottom Institute of Agriculture, Technology & Sciences, Allahabad, Uttar 
Pradesh 211007, India. phvikas@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Aegle marmelos (L.) Corr. (Rutaceae), commonly known as bael, is 
used to treat fevers, abdomen pain, palpitation of the heart, urinary troubles, 
melancholia, anorexia, dyspepsia, diabetes and diarrhea in Indian traditional 
systems of medicine. The object of the present study was to evaluate the 
antidiabetic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidant oxidative stress of 
umbelliferone β-D-galactopyranoside (UFG) from stem bark of Aegle marmelos 
Correa. in STZ (streptozotocin) induced diabetic rat.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in rat by single intraperitoneal injection of STZ 
(60 mg/kg). The rat was divided into the following groups; I - normal control, 
II - diabetic control, III - UFG (10 mg/kg), IV - UFG (20 mg/kg), V - UFG (40 
mg/kg), VI - Glibenclamide (10 mg/kg, p.o., once a daily dose). Diabetes was 
measured by change the level blood glucose, plasma insulin and the oxidative 
stress were assessed in the liver by estimation of the level of antioxidant 
markers i.e. superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), catalase 
(CAT) and Malondialdehyde (MDA) and antihyperlipidemic effect was measured by 
estimation of total cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL (low density lipoprotein) 
cholesterol, HDL (high density lipoprotein) cholesterol, VLDL (very low density 
lipoprotein) cholesterol. However in a study, the increased body weight was 
observed and utilization of glucose was in the oral glucose tolerance test.
RESULT: Daily oral administration of different dose of UFG for 28 days showed 
significantly (P < 0.001) decreased in fasting blood glucose level and improve 
plasma insulin level as compared to the diabetic control group. Also it 
significantly (P < 0.001) decreased the level of glycated hemoglobin, 
glucose-6-phosphatase, fructose-1-6-biphosphate and increased the level of 
hexokinase. UFG treatment decreased liver MDA and increased the level of SOD, 
GPx and CAT. UFG treatment of lipids it's increased the level of cholesterol, 
triglycerides, VLDL, LDL cholesterol and decreased the level of HDL cholesterol. 
Histologically, inflammatory cell in blood vessels, intercalated disc, fat 
degeneration and focal necrosis observed in diabetic rat organ but was less 
obvious in UFG treated groups. The mechanism of action of UFG may be due to the 
increased level of pancreatic insulin secretion and effect on the antioxidant 
marker.
CONCLUSION: UFG posses an antidiabetic, antioxidant and antihyperlipidemic 
effect on the STZ induced diabetic rat. Hence it could be the better choice to 
cure the diabetes.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-13-273
PMCID: PMC3833852
PMID: 24138888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Indian J Exp Biol. 2009 Jul;47(7):564-70.

Antihyperglycemic, antihyperlipidemic and antioxidant effects of Dihar, a 
polyherbal ayurvedic formulation in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats.

Patel SS(1), Shah RS, Goyal RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, L.M. College of Pharmacy, Gujarat University, 
Ahmedabad 380 009, India.

Present investigation was undertaken to evaluate antihyperglycemic, 
antihyperlipidemic and antioxidant activities of Dihar, a polyherbal formulation 
containing drugs from eight different herbs viz., Syzygium cumini, Momordica 
charantia, Emblica officinalis, Gymnema sylvestre, Enicostemma littorale, 
Azadirachta indica, Tinospora cordifolia and Curcuma longa in streptozotocin 
(STZ, 45 mg/kg iv single dose) induced type 1 diabetic rats. STZ produced a 
significant increase in serum glucose, cholesterol, triglyceride, very low 
density lipoprotein, low density lipoprotein, creatinine, and urea levels in 
diabetic rat. Treatment with Dihar (100 mg/kg) for 6 weeks produced decrease in 
STZ induced serum glucose and lipids levels and increased insulin levels as 
compared to control. Dihar produced significant decrease in serum creatinine and 
urea levels in diabetic rats. There was a significant decrease in reduced 
glutathione, superoxide dismutase, catalase levels and increase in 
thiobarbituiric acid reactive species levels in the liver of STZ-induced 
diabetic rats. Administration of Dihar to diabetic rats significantly reduced 
the levels of lipid paroxidation and increased the activities of antioxidant 
enzymes. The results suggest Dihar to be beneficial for the treatment of type 1 
diabetes.

PMID: 19761040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Ethnopharmacol. 1999 Nov 30;67(3):367-72. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(99)00095-1.

A comparative evaluation of some blood sugar lowering agents of plant origin.

Chattopadhyay RR(1).

Author information:
(1)Biometry Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta.

A comparison of blood sugar lowering activity of four important medicinal plants 
(Azadirachta indica, Gymnema sylvestre, Catharanthus roseus and Ocimum sanctum) 
were carried out against normal and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat models. 
The plant extracts decreased the blood sugar level in varying degrees. Blood 
sugar lowering unit (BLU) of activity of each leaf extract and tolbutamide was 
calculated by ED50 values. Statistical analysis revealed significant (P < 0.05) 
variation among the treatments as well as doses with regard to their blood sugar 
lowering capacity. A. indica leaf extract was found to have the most potent 
blood sugar-lowering activity followed by C. roseus, G. sylvestre and O. 
sanctum.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(99)00095-1
PMID: 10617074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Phytother Res. 2001 May;15(3):213-8. doi: 10.1002/ptr.707.

Antioxidant action of Tinospora cordifolia root extract in alloxan diabetic 
rats.

Stanely Mainzen Prince P(1), Menon VP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar - 608 002, 
Tamil Nadu, India.

Tinospora cordifolia is widely used in Indian Ayurvedic medicine for the 
treatment of diabetes mellitus. Oral administration of 2.5 g and 5.0 g/kg body 
weight of the aqueous extract of the roots for 6 weeks resulted in a significant 
reduction in thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) and an increase in 
reduced glutathione (GSH), catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) in 
alloxan diabetic rats. The effect of Tinospora cordifolia root extract (TCREt) 
was most prominently seen in the case of rats given 5.0 g/kg body weight. The 
effect of TCREt was more effective than glibenclamide. Thus our study shows that 
TCREt exhibits antioxidant action in alloxan diabetes.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.707
PMID: 11351355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Indian J Exp Biol. 2016 Oct;54(10):650-658.

Carissa congesta Wight and Benincasa hispida (Thunb.) Cogn. as budding 
immunomodulatory agents.

Une HD, Doshi GM.

Carissa congesta and Benincasa hispida are well-known medicinally important 
plants associated with diabetes, inflammation, protozal infections and cancer. 
Here, we emphasized up on the immunomodulatory potential of these plants as the 
source of lupeol, P-sitosterol and ursolic acid. Petroleum ether extracts of C. 
congesta roots and B. hispida seeds were subjected to acute toxicity studies. 
They were screened for its immunomodulatory prospective in rats by 
Haemagglutination Antibody (HA) titre and Delayed-Type Hypersensitivity (DTH) 
response using Sheep Red Blood Cells (SRBCs of-0.5x10⁹) as antigens. Carbon 
Clearance test (Phagocytic Index) was estimated by Indian ink suspension. 
Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA) induced arthritis model interpretation was done 
by paw edema, kene joint erosion (transverse section), body weights, arthritic 
index and biochemical levels (RBC, WBC and Hb levels). Both the extracts were 
found to be therapeutically safe up to 5000 mg/kg. Dosage of 100 mg/kg was not 
satisfactory; and 500 and 250 mg/kg showed significant immunostimmulation (HA 
Titre) and immunosuppression (DTH response, 48 h). Benincasa hispida seed and 
Carissa congesta root extracts showed phagocytic Index of 0.0163±0.003, 
0.0145±0.003 and 0.0183±0.003, 0.0176±0.003 at 250 mg/kg and 500 mg/kg, 
respectively. CFA model revealed that the B. hispida seed and C. congesta root 
extracts decreased paw volume, knee joint erosion, increased body weights and 
biochemical parameters with an arthritic index of 1.31±0.12, 1.44±0.15 and 1. 
16±0.09, 1.36±0.13 at 250 mg/kg and 500 mg, respectively. The results were 
interpreted by One- way ANOVA followed by Dunnett test. Extracts showed 
relevance as promising immunostimulators as compared to control.

PMID: 30084565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Pharmacol Res Commun. 1981 May;13(5):475-86. doi: 10.1016/s0031-6989(81)80074-4.

The insulinotropic activity of Gymnema sylvestre, R. Br. An Indian medical herb 
used in controlling diabetes mellitus.

Shanmugasundaram KR, Panneerselvam C, Samudram P, Shanmugasundaram ER.

DOI: 10.1016/s0031-6989(81)80074-4
PMID: 7027275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Indian J Pharmacol. 2014 May-Jun;46(3):350-1. doi: 10.4103/0253-7613.132204.

In vitro study on α-amylase inhibitory activity of an Ayurvedic medicinal plant, 
Anacyclus pyrethrum DC root.

Kumar VK(1), Lalitha KG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Phytopharmacy and Phytomedicine, J. K. K. Munirajah Medical 
Research Foundation's, Annai J. K. K Sampoorani Ammal College of Pharmacy, B. 
Komarapalayam, Namakkal, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Ultra College of Pharmacy, Madurai, 
Tamil Nadu, India.

DOI: 10.4103/0253-7613.132204
PMCID: PMC4071720
PMID: 24987190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Indian J Exp Biol. 2010 May;48(5):499-502.

Effect of Cyclea peltata Lam. roots aqueous extract on glucose levels, lipid 
profile, insulin, TNF-alpha and skeletal muscle glycogen in type 2 diabetic 
rats.

Kirana H(1), Srinivasan BP.

Author information:
(1)Delhi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research, Sector-III, Pushp 
Vihar, New Delhi 110017, India.

In view of multi-dimensional activity of plant drugs beneficial to complex 
disorders like diabetes, the present study has been undertaken to evaluate the 
effect of aqueous extract of C. peltata roots on serum glucose, lipid profile, 
insulin, inflammatory marker namely tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and 
muscle glycogen in type 2 diabetic rats. Aqueous extract of C. peltata at 40 and 
60 mg/kg dose significantly decreased both the fasting and postprandial blood 
glucose of type 2 diabetic rats; 60 mg/kg dose having more pronounced effect on 
hyperglycemia. An enhanced insulin levels by the aqueous extract is primary for 
its glucose and lipid lowering activity. The extract significantly decreased the 
elevated TNF-alpha in type 2 diabetic rats. The extract at 40 and 60 mg/kg dose 
increased the glycogen levels in skeletal muscle by 58 and 60% respectively. 
Improved glycogen in peripheral tissue such as skeletal muscle indicates the 
ability of plant drug to combat insulin resistance of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 20795368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Indian J Exp Biol. 2010 Feb;48(2):165-73.

Hypolipidaemic and antioxidant effects of fruits of Musa AAA (Chenkadali) in 
alloxan induced diabetic rats.

Kaimal S(1), Sujatha KS, George S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Biochemistry, Faculty of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, Mannuthy, Thrissur 680 651, India.

Hypolipidaemic and antioxidant effects of ethanol extract of mature green fruits 
of Musa AAA (Chenkadali) was evaluated in alloxan induced diabetic rats. The 
effect of extract at two doses, 500 mg/kg body weight and 1000 mg/kg body weight 
was analysed and compared with a standard drug, glibenclamide. Rats administered 
with alloxan showed significantly increased levels of serum triacylglycerol, 
total cholesterol and alanine amino transferase (ALT) activity. Lipid peroxides 
increased significantly while reduced glutathione (GSH) decreased considerably 
in liver and pancreas. Oral administration of the ethanol extract of fruits of 
Musa AAA (Chenkadali) significantly decreased the levels of serum 
triacylglycerol, cholesterol and ALT activity. Significant decrease was also 
observed in the level of lipid peroxides while GSH content increased 
substantially in liver and pancreas. The effect was dose independent and rats 
treated with 500 mg/kg body weight showed comparable levels of serum 
triacylglycerol, cholesterol, ALT activity and liver lipid peroxides to that of 
normal control and glibenclamide treated groups. Although, there was no 
significant difference, treatment with 500 mg/kg body weight of the extract 
showed a higher content of GSH and lower level of lipid peroxides in pancreas 
compared with glibenclamide. Histopathological examination of pancreas and liver 
revealed regeneration of islet cells and hepatocytes respectively, which 
correlate with the biochemical findings. The present study shows that ethanol 
extract of mature green fruits of Musa AAA (Chenkadali) has antioxidant and 
hypolipidaemic properties and may be used for treating diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 20455326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Med Food. 2008 Sep;11(3):506-12. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2007.0042.

Effect of Indian herbal hypoglycemic agents on antioxidant capacity and trace 
elements content in diabetic rats.

Chandra A(1), Mahdi AA, Singh RK, Mahdi F, Chander R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, King George's Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar 
Pradesh, India.

In the present investigation we report the protective potential of some herbal 
hypoglycemic agents on antioxidant status and levels of metal ions in 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Furthermore, in vitro antioxidant activity 
of the herbs was also evaluated. Induction of diabetes mellitus in rats caused 
an increase in blood lipid peroxide levels that was associated with the reduced 
activity of red blood cell (RBC) antioxidant enzymes--namely, superoxide 
dismutase, catalase, glutathione reductase, and glutathione peroxidase--along 
with depletion of plasma reduced glutathione (GSH) and copper, zinc, iron, 
magnesium, and selenium levels. Oral treatment of diabetic rats with Allium 
sativum, Azadirachta indica, Momordica charantia, and Ocimum sanctum extracts 
(500 mg/kg of body weight) not only lowered the blood glucose level but also 
inhibited the formation of lipid peroxides, reactivated the antioxidant enzymes, 
and restored levels of GSH and metals in the above-mentioned model. The herbal 
extracts (50-500 microg) inhibited the generation of superoxide anions 
(O(2)(-.)) in both enzymatic and nonenzymatic in vitro systems. These 
preparations also inhibited the ferrous-sodium ascorbate-induced formation of 
lipid peroxides in RBCs. The in vivo and in vitro protective effects of the 
above-mentioned herbal drugs were also compared with that of glibenclamide. On 
the basis of our results, we conclude that the above-mentioned herbal plants not 
only possess hypoglycemic properties, but they also decrease oxidative load in 
diabetes mellitus. Therefore, we propose that long-term use of such agents might 
help in the prevention of diabetes-associated complications. However, the 
extrapolation of these results to humans needs further in-depth study.

DOI: 10.1089/jmf.2007.0042
PMID: 18800899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Indian J Med Res. 2012 May;135(5):636-41.

Immunostimulant, cerebroprotective & nootropic activities of Andrographis 
paniculata leaves extract in normal & type 2 diabetic rats.

Radhika P(1), Annapurna A, Rao SN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, India.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: A large number of plants have been recognized to be 
effective in the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Persistent hyperglycaemia is 
associated with decreased function of immune system and cerebral ischaemia 
mainly due to increased oxidative stress and inflammatory response. Andrographis 
paniculata is a medicinal plant widely used in folk medicine for various 
purposes. In this study the effect of chronic administration (7 days) of 
methanolic extract of A. paniculata leaves was studied in rats with 
experimentally induced diabetes, nootropic and immunostimulant activities were 
evaluated. The effect of acute administration of methanolic extract of A. 
paniculata leaves was also studied for cerebroprotective activity.
METHODS: Type 2 diabetes was induced in rats by streptozotocin (STZ) (65 mg/kg) 
+ nicotinamide (150 mg/kg). Various biochemical parameters were estimated using 
standard methods.
RESULTS: A significant (P<0.05) increase in cognitive function was observed in 
both normal and type 2 diabetic rats. Nootropic activity in terms of per cent 
reduction in latency period was more in type 2 diabetic rats. A significant 
increase in blood lymphocyte count, splenic lymphocyte count and peritoneal 
macrophage count was observed in both normal and type 2 diabetic rats. 
Immunostimulant activity was observed more in type 2 diabetic rats. The per cent 
decrease in cerebral infarction was more in type 2 diabetic rats when compared 
to normal rats. The per cent increase in superoxide dismutase (SOD) levels was 
more in type 2 diabetic rats.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: The antioxidant activity of the methanolic extract 
of A. paniculata leaves was evident by decreased tissue malondialdehyde (MDA) 
levels and increased SOD levels. These properties may be responsible for the 
observed cerebroprotective activity. The methanolic leaf extract of A. 
paniculata showed significant immunostimulant, cerebroprotective and nootropic 
activities in normal and type 2 diabetic rats.

PMCID: PMC3401693
PMID: 22771592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Ethnopharmacol. 1996 Jan;50(1):13-7. doi: 10.1016/0378-8741(95)01329-6.

Effects of Artemisia pallens Wall. on blood glucose levels in normal and 
alloxan-induced diabetic rats.

Subramoniam A(1), Pushpangadan P, Rajasekharan S, Evans DA, Latha PG, Valsaraj 
R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Ethnopharmacology, Tropical Botanic Garden and Research 
Institute, Palode, Kerala, India.

Oral administration of the methanol extract of the aerial parts of Artemisia 
pallens Wall. (used in Indian folk medicine for the treatment of diabetes 
mellitus) led to significant blood glucose lowering effect in glucose-fed 
hyperglycaemic and alloxan-induced diabetic rats. This effect of the extract was 
dose dependent and significant at 100 mg/kg level in glucose-fed rats. In fasted 
normal rats, the extract caused a moderate hypoglycaemic effect at a higher dose 
(1000 mg/kg). The water extract (1000 mg/kg) was inactive.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-8741(95)01329-6
PMID: 8778502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Indian J Exp Biol. 2013 Sep;51(9):702-8.

Anti-diabetic and antihyperlipidemic effect of allopolyherbal formulation in 
OGTT and STZ-induced diabetic rat model.

Manik S(1), Gauttam V, Kalia AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, ISF College of Pharmacy, Moga, 1420 01, India.

The present study was undertaken to evaluate the antidiabetic and 
antihyperlipidemic activities of Allopolyherbal formulation (APHF) consisting of 
combinations of three well known medicinal plants used in traditional medicines 
(Trigonella foenum graceum, Momordica charantia, Aegle marmelos) and synthetic 
oral hypoglycaemic drug (Glipizide-GL). The optimized combination of lyophilized 
hydro-alcoholic extracts of drugs was 2:2:1 using OGTT model. The optimized PHF 
was simultaneously administered with GL and optimized using OGTT model in 
diabetic rats and further studied in STZ-induced diabetic rats for 21 days. The 
results (serum glucose level, lipid profile, hepatic enzymes and body weight) 
were compared with the standard drug GL (10 mg/kg body wt). The optimized APHF 
(500+5 mg/kg body wt) has shown significant antihyperglycemic and 
antihyperlipidemic activities. The results were comparable with the standard; 
even better than the GL (10 mg/kg body wt) alone. The proposed hypothesis has 
reduced the no. of drug components from eight to three and dose almost 50% of 
both PHF and GL which fulfil the FDA requirements for export. Thus the developed 
APHF will be an ideal alternative for the existing hypoglycemic formulations in 
the market with an additional advantage of hypolipidemic effect and minimizing 
the cardiovascular risk factors associated with diabetes.

PMID: 24377129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Am J Health Behav. 2006 Jan-Feb;30(1):39-50. doi: 10.5555/ajhb.2006.30.1.39.

Ethnic differences in elders' home remedy use: sociostructural explanations.

Grzywacz JG(1), Arcury TA, Bell RA, Lang W, Suerken CK, Smith SL, Quandt SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1084, USA. grzywacz@wfubmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine if ethnic differences in elders' use of home remedies 
are explained by structured inequalities.
METHOD: Dichotomous indicators of "food" and "other" home remedies were obtained 
from a randomly selected cohort of older adults with diabetes (N=701). Analyses 
evaluated if differences in availability of care, economic hardship, and health 
status explained ethnic differences in home remedy use.
RESULTS: Differences in residential location, discretionary money, and health 
partially explained greater home remedy use among Black and Native American 
elders relative to whites.
CONCLUSIONS: Ethnic differences in elders' use of home remedies are not largely 
attributed to socially structured inequalities.

DOI: 10.5555/ajhb.2006.30.1.39
PMCID: PMC1613261
PMID: 16430319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Pharmacogn Mag. 2016 Jul;12(Suppl 4):S488-S496. doi: 10.4103/0973-1296.191467.

Free radical scavenging, α-glucosidase inhibitory and anti-inflammatory 
constituents from Indian sedges, Cyperus scariosus R.Br and Cyperus rotundus L.

Kakarla L(1), Katragadda SB(2), Tiwari AK(3), Kotamraju KS(4), Madhusudana K(3), 
Kumar DA(3), Botlagunta M(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, K L E F 
University, Vaddeswaram, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(2)Division of Natural Products Chemistry, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, India.
(3)Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Uppal Road, Hyderabad, India.
(4)Centre for Chemical Biology, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Uppal Road, Hyderabad, India.

BACKGROUND: Cyperus scariosus R. Br and Cyperus rotundus L are widely used in 
ayurvedic preparation for the treatment of diabetes and other diseases. The 
early literature, so far, does not indicate the presence of any bioactive 
principle isolated from these plants.
OBJECTIVE: To identify free radical scavenging, anti-diabetic and anti- 
inflammatory principles from these two species.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The bioassay guided fractionation and isolation of active 
constituents was done by chromatographic techniques. They also evaluated their 
anti-oxidant activity by DPPH and ABTS. The anti-diabetic activity was screened 
by α- glucosidase and α- amylase assays. Also, the further evaluation of in 
vitro anti-inflammatory activity using THP-1 monocytic cells and in vivo anti- 
inflammatory activity, was confirmed by carrageenan induced rat paw edema as 
model.
RESULTS: The activity guided isolation led to isolation of twelve compounds 
Which are: Stigmasterol[1], β- sitosterol[2], Lupeol[3], Gallic acid[4], 
Quercetin[5], β- amyrin[6], Oleanolic acid[7], β- amyrin acetate[8], 4- hydroxyl 
butyl cinnamate[9], 4- hydroxyl cinnamic acid[10], Caffeic acid,[11] and 
Kaempferol[12] respectively. Among the isolates, the compounds 4 and 5 displayed 
potent radical scavenging activity with an IC50 values of 0.43 and 0.067 ΅g/ml. 
The compounds 4, 5 and 10 showed significant anti-diabetic activities. while 
lupeol[3] showed potent IL-1 β activity inhibition in THP-1 monocytic cells and 
also displayed significant (p<0.0025) in vivo anti-inflammatory activity.
CONCLUSION: Inbrief, we isolated twelve compounds from both the species. 
Collectively, our results suggested that aromatic compounds showed good 
anti-oxidant and anti-diabetic activities.
SUMMARY: The study investigates the free radical scavenging, α-glucosidase 
inhibitory and anti-inflammatory effects of constituents isolated from Indian 
sedges viz. C. scariosus and C. rotundus. The results indicated that phenolic 
compounds displayed potent fee radical scavenging activty and alpha-glucosidase 
inhibition activity. While terpene constituent, Lupeol[3] showed good IL-1β 
activity inhibition in THP-1 monocytic cells and also displayed significant 
(p<0.0025) in vivo anti inflammatory activity in carrageenan induced rat paw 
edema. However, further studies are required to know the exact molecular 
mechanism. Abbreviations used: DPPH: 2,2- Diphenyl-1-1-picryl hydrazyl, ABTS: 
2,2-Azinobis-3-ethylbenzo thiazoline-6-sulfonic acid, THP-1: Human leukaemia 
monocytic cell line, IL-1β: Interleukin-1β, IC50-Inhibitory concentration 50%.

DOI: 10.4103/0973-1296.191467
PMCID: PMC5068129
PMID: 27761080


117. Bangladesh Med Res Counc Bull. 1979 Dec;5(2):60-6.

Coccinia indica in the treatment of patients with diabetes mellitus.

Azad Khan AK, Akhtar S, Mahtab H.

Coccinia indica is a creeper which grows wildly in Bangladesh and in many parts 
of the Indian sub-continent. The plant has been used since ancient times as an 
antidiabetic drug by physicians who practice the Indian system of medicine known 
as Ayurvedha. We have conducted a double blind control trial with preparation 
from the leaves of the plant on uncontrolled, maturity onset diabetics. The 
trial lasted for six weeks for an individual patient. Out of the 16 patients who 
received the experimental preparations 10 showed marked improvement in their 
glucose tolerance while none out of the 16 patients in the dummy group showed 
such a marked improvement. This difference is highly significant (kappa 2 with 
Yates' correction = 11.7, P < 0.001).

PMID: 399436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Phytother Res. 2002 Dec;16(8):774-7. doi: 10.1002/ptr.1064.

Prevention of experimental diabetic cataract by Indian Ayurvedic plant extracts.

Rathi SS(1), Grover JK, Vikrant V, Biswas NR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Dr Rajendra Prasad Center of Ophthalmic Sciences, 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi - 110029, 
India.

The efficacy of Momordica charantia (MC), Eugenia jambolana (EJ), Tinospora 
cordifolia (TC) and Mucuna pruriens (MP) was assessed in the prevention of 
murine alloxan dibetic cataract. Alloxan (120 mg/kg) was used as the 
diabetogenic agent. While controls and diabetic controls did not receive any 
plant extract, treated rats received lyophilized aqueous extract of MC and EJ 
(200 mg/kg p.o.), alcohol extract of TC (400 mg/kg) and MP (200 mg/kg p.o.) 
every day until 4 months. Serum glucose concentration was assessed and cataracts 
examined with both the naked eye and through a slit lamp. Of the eight animals 
in the diabetic control group, four developed cortical cataract (stage IV) by 
day 90 while the remaining four developed it by day 100. The incidence rate of 
cataract in MC, EJ, TC and MP treated groups at 120 days was only 0, 0, 1 and 2. 
Oral feeding of MC, EJ, TC and MP extracts for 1 month produced a fall of 
64.33%, 55.62%, 38.01% and 40.17%, respectively, in the serum glucose levels in 
comparison with the 48 h level. After 2 months of treatment, the respective 
values were 66.96%, 59.85%, 40.41% and 45.63%. MC and EJ prevented the 
development of cataract while the protective effect was less with TC and MP 
along with a significant reduction of plasma glucose levels (p < 0.001).

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.1064
PMID: 12458487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Indian J Med Sci. 1968 Jan;22(1):28-9.

'Ragi' in the management of diabetes mellitus.

Patel JC, Dhirawani MK, Darne RD.

PMID: 5654712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Indian J Med Sci. 1968 Jan;22(1):30-2.

"Karella" in the treatment of diabetes mellitus.

Patel JC, Dhirawani MK, Doshi JC.

PMID: 5654713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Pharm Biol. 2014 Feb;52(2):268-71. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2013.823550. Epub 2013 
Sep 30.

A molecular connection of Pterocarpus marsupium, Eugenia jambolana and Gymnema 
sylvestre with dipeptidyl peptidase-4 in the treatment of diabetes.

Kosaraju J(1), Dubala A, Chinni S, Khatwal RB, Satish Kumar MN, Basavan D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy .

CONTEXT: Pterocarpus marsupium (PM) (Leguminosae), Eugenia jambolana (EJ) 
(Myrtaceae) and Gymnema sylvestre (GS) (Asclepiadaceae) are the most important 
medicinal plants in the Indian system of traditional medicine for the treatment 
of hyperglycemia.
OBJECTIVES: Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitors are the emerging class of 
anti-diabetic agents. However, only few compounds are commercially available. 
Therefore, in the present study we tried to explore the naturally occurring PM, 
EJ and GS semi-standardized extracts for their potential DPP-4 inhibition in 
vitro and in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DPP-4 inhibition was evaluated by in vitro inhibitory 
assay, and enzyme kinetics were calculated using one-phase exponential decay 
equation. Glucose load (2 g/kg) was administered to control and diabetic rats 
30 min following extract administration (100, 200 and 400 mg/kg) orally once, 
and blood samples were withdrawn at 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 and 3 h to measure plasma 
active glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) levels.
RESULTS: PM and EJ inhibit DPP-4 potently with IC50 values of 273.73 ± 2.96 and 
278.94 ± 6.73 µg/mL, respectively, compared to GS (773.22 ± 9.21 µg/mL). PM, EJ 
and GS exhibit long duration of action with enzyme inhibitory half-lives of 
462.3, 317.2 and 153.8 min, respectively. Extracts significantly increase GLP-1 
levels compared to negative control groups and peak GLP-1 level was observed at 
2 h for PM and EJ, whereas for GS it was at 1.5 h
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Taken together, results suggest the extracts may have 
potent DPP-4 inhibitory action, and their hypoglycemic action attributed through 
an increase in plasma active GLP-1 levels.

DOI: 10.3109/13880209.2013.823550
PMID: 24074231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1963 Oct;7:240-4.

ON THE PRESENCE OF AN ANTIDIABETIC PRINCIPLE IN MOMORDICA CHARANTIA.

CHATTERJEE KP.

PMID: 14175615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Indian J Exp Biol. 2001 May;39(5):500-2.

Antidiabetic activity of a polyherbal preparation (tincture of panchparna) in 
normal and diabetic rats.

Annapurna A(1), Mahalakshmi DK, Krishna KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Andhra University, Visakhapatnam 530 
003, India.

The present work was executed to evaluate the anti-diabetic potency of a 
polyherbal formulation, and its influence on derangement in the metabolism of 
glucose and cholesterol and changes in sodium levels in serum and urine in 
normal and alloxan induced diabetic rats. Serum glucose and serum cholesterol 
levels were found to be increased in diabetic animals. Serum sodium and urinary 
sodium, hepatic glycogen levels are found to be decreased in diabetic state. 
Treatment with the polyherbal formulation (1.0 ml/kg body wt) for 30 days in 
diabetic animals has shown decrease in serum glucose and serum cholesterol 
levels in comparison to control animals, whereas in normal treated animals, the 
formulation does not effect the serum glucose and serum cholesterol levels. 
Serum sodium and urinary sodium levels were increased in both diabetic treated 
and the control animals. Hepatic glycogen levels were increased in diabetic 
treated animals, but there was no change in the control treated animals.

PMID: 11510141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Pharm Biol. 2013 Jun;51(6):798-805. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2013.766894.

Therapeutic potential of octyl gallate isolated from fruits of Terminalia 
bellerica in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Latha RC(1), Daisy P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Holy Cross College, Trichy 620002 Nadu, India. 
latha2611@gmail.com

CONTEXT: Medicinal plants are a potential source of antidiabetic drugs. 
Terminalia bellerica Roxb. (Combretaceae) is used in Indian traditional systems 
of medicine to treat diabetes mellitus.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to isolate and identify antihyperglycemic 
principle(s) from the fruits of T. bellerica and assess the bioactivity in 
streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bioassay-guided fractionation was followed to isolate the 
active compound(s), structure was elucidated using (1)H and (13)C NMR, IR and 
mass spectrometry and administered intragastrically to diabetic Wistar rats at 
different doses (5, 10 and 20 mg/kg, body weight) for 28 d. Plasma glucose, 
insulin, C-peptide and other biochemical parameters were studied.
RESULTS: Octyl gallate (OG) isolated first time from the fruit rind of T. 
bellerica significantly (p < 0.05) reduced plasma glucose to near normal values 
(108.47 ± 6.9 mg/dl) after 14 d at the dose of 20 mg/kg. In addition, OG 
significantly increased plasma insulin, C-peptide, total protein, albumin, 
tissue glycogen, body weight and markedly decreased serum total cholesterol, 
triglyceride, LDL-cholesterol, urea, uric acid and creatinine in diabetic rats. 
Also OG restored the altered regulatory enzymes of carbohydrate metabolism.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: OG might have augmented the secretion of insulin by 
the modulation of cAMP and intracellular calcium levels in the β cells of the 
pancreas. Our findings indicate that OG isolated first time from the fruit rind 
of T. bellerica has potential antidiabetic effect as it augments insulin 
secretion and normalizes the altered biochemical parameters in experimental 
diabetic rat models.

DOI: 10.3109/13880209.2013.766894
PMID: 23675839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Indian J Exp Biol. 1995 Nov;33(11):861-4.

Diuretic, hypotensive and hypoglycaemic effect of Phyllanthus amarus.

Srividya N(1), Periwal S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Home Science, Sri Sathya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, 
Anantapur, India.

Diuretic, hypotensive and hypoglycaemic effects of Phyllanthus amarus (syn. 
Phyllanthus niruri) on human subjects were assessed. Nine mild hypertensives 
(four of them also suffering from diabetes mellitus) were treated with a 
preparation of the whole plant of P. amarus for 10 days. Suitable parameters 
were studied in the blood and urine samples of the subjects, along with 
physiological profile and dietary pattern before and after the treatment period. 
Significant increase in 24 hr urine volume, urine and serum Na levels was 
observed. A significant reduction in systolic blood pressure in non-diabetic 
hypertensives and female subjects was noted. Blood glucose was also 
significantly reduced in the treated group. Clinical observations revealed no 
harmful side effects. These observations indicate that P. amarus is a potential 
diuretic, hypotensive and hypoglycaemic drug for humans.

PMID: 8786163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Indian J Exp Biol. 2013 Dec;51(12):1101-8.

Anti-diabetic effect of a combination of andrographolide-enriched extract of 
Andrographis paniculata (Burm f.) Nees and asiaticoside-enriched extract of 
Centella asiatica L. in high fructose-fat fed rats.

Nugroho AE(1), Lindawati NY(2), Herlyanti K(2), Widyastuti L(2), Pramono S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universitas Gadjah Mada, Jogjakarta, Indonesia, 55281. 
agungendronugroho@yahoo.com
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, 
Universitas Gadjah Mada, Jogjakarta, Indonesia, 55281.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Gadjah 
Mada, Jogjakarta, Indonesia, 55281.

Traditionally, a combination of medicinal plants is commonly used for lowering 
blood glucose in diabetic patients in order to provide additional benefits of 
the single drug. A. paniculata and C. asiatica are two traditional medicines 
form South Asian and Southeast Asain countries consumed by people for treating 
daibates mellitus and its complications. Hyperglycemia in the rats was 
stimulated by high fructose-fat diet that consists of 36% fructose, 15% lard, 
and 5% egg yolks in 0.36 g/200 g body weight for 70 days. The rats were orally 
administered with the combination of andrographolide-enriched extract of A. 
paniculata (AEEAP) leaves and asiaticoside-enriched extract of C. asiatica 
(AEECA) herbs from day 70 for 7 days. Antidiabetic activity was evaluated by 
estimating mainly the blood glucose levels and other parameters such as HDL, 
LDL, cholesterol and triglyceride. The results showed that combination at the 
ratio of 70:30 exhibited a promosing antidiabetic effect in 
high-fat-fructose-fed rat, and exhibited sinergistic effects on blood 
cholesterol and HDL levels. It can be concluded that its antidiabetic effect was 
better than that of single treatment of AEEAP or AEECA. That combination was 
also potential to develop as a blood glucose-lowering agent for diabetic 
patients.

PMID: 24579376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Indian J Exp Biol. 1993 Jul;31(7):595-9.

Effect of indigenous drugs on glucuronoglycan metabolism in diabetic 
hypertensive rabbits.

Kumari KS(1), Devi KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kerala, Trivandrum, India.

Development of hypertension further exaggerated the deranged level of total 
glucuronoglycan (GAG), different fractions of GAG, activities of synthetic and 
degradative enzymes of GAG and biological sulphation observed in diabetic 
rabbits. Administration of indigenous drug preparations (nisakathakathi Kashayam 
and rasnairandadi Kashayam and its mixture) ameliorated the diabetic 
hypertensive condition by reversing these effects and thereby arrested.

PMID: 8225415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Indian J Exp Biol. 1993 Nov;31(11):891-3.

Hypoglycemic effect of Ocimum sanctum leaf extract in normal and streptozotocin 
diabetic rats.

Chattopadhyay RR(1).

Author information:
(1)Biometry Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta.

Oral administration of alcoholic extract of leaves of O. sanctum led to marked 
lowering of blood sugar level in normal, glucose fed hyperglycemic and 
streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Further the extract potentiated the action 
of exogenous insulin in normal rats. The activity of the extract was 91.55 and 
70.43% of that of tolbutamide in normal and diabetic rats respectively.

PMID: 8112763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Indian J Med Sci. 1985 Feb;39(2):27-9, 42.

A study on the anti-diabetic activity of Coccinia indica in dogs.

Singh N, Singh SP, Vrat S, Misra N, Dixit KS, Kohli RP.

PMID: 3997215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Br J Nutr. 1992 Sep;68(2):445-50. doi: 10.1079/bjn19920102.

Glycaemic index of conventional carbohydrate meals.

Mani UV(1), Pradhan SN, Mehta NC, Thakur DM, Iyer U, Mani I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, M.S. University of Baroda, Gujarat, India.

The glycaemic index (GI) and the triacylglycerol response were measured in 
thirty non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus patients given 50 g portions of 
five different conventional Indian meals containing semolina (Triticum aestivum) 
cooked by two different methods, or combinations of semolina and pulse (black 
gram dhal (Phaseolus mungo), green gram dhal (Phaseolus aureus) or Bengal gram 
dhal (Cicer arietum)). There were no significant differences among meals in mean 
GI except for meals based on roasted semolina or semolina-black gram dhal. 
Compared with the blood glucose response for a 50 g glucose load, only meals 
based on steam-cooked semolina and semolina-Bengal gram dhal elicited a 
significantly lower response at 1 h postprandially, and only meals based on 
semolina-black gram dhal at 2 h postprandially. No significant differences were 
found among the meals in the triacylglycerol-response.

DOI: 10.1079/bjn19920102
PMID: 1445824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Indian J Exp Biol. 2001 Sep;39(9):925-8.

Biochemical studies on hypoglycemic effect of Aavirai kudineer: a herbal 
formulation in alloxan diabetic rats.

Bhavapriya V(1), Kalpana S, Govindasamy S, Apparanantham T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Madras, 
Chennai, India.

Aavirai Kudineer (AK) is an herbal decoction of seven botanical drugs, cited in 
the Gunapadam; a Tamil Siddha medical text. The anti-diabetic efficacy of this 
formulation was evaluated using alloxan-induced diabetic and normal rats. 
Glucose tolerance was observed within 1 hr in AK-treated rats (10 ml/kg body ) 
as compared to control. A significant decrease in the severe hyperglycemia 
characteristic of alloxan diabetes was noted after 15 days of AK treatment. 
Further AK treatment reversed the elevated urea, creatinine, cholesterol and 
decreased protein values to near normal levels. Assay of glycogen content and 
chief carbohydrate-metabolizing enzymes, viz. hexokinase, glucose-6-phosphatase 
and fructose 1,6 diphosphatase in the liver of diabetic and AK-treated diabetic 
rats clearly ascertains the hypoglycemic efficacy of this formulation. The mode 
of action of this herbal formulation remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 11831378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Indian J Med Res. 1982 Oct;76:583-90.

Plasma insulin response to legumes and carbohydrate foods.

Kamath PS, Dilawari JB, Raghavan S, Batta RP, Mukewar S, Dash RJ.

PMID: 6759379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Indian J Exp Biol. 2008 Oct;46(10):690-7.

Protective effect of dietary phytochemicals against arsenite induced 
genotoxicity in mammalian V79 cells.

Roy M(1), Sinha D, Mukherjee S, Paul S, Bhattacharya RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Carcinogenesis and Toxicology, Chittaranjan 
National Cancer Institute, 37, S P Mukherjee Road, Kolkata 700 026, India. 
mitacnci@yahoo.co.in

Chronic arsenic exposure causes skin diseases, gastrointestinal and neurological 
disorders, diabetes and cancer in various organs. Oxidative stress associated 
with arsenic exposure cause genetic instabilities and may initiate 
carcinogenesis. Phytochemicals present in vegetables, fruits, spices, tea, and 
medicinal plants, have shown to suppress experimental carcinogenesis in various 
organs. The aim of the present study was to elucidate the protective effect of 
some of the phytochemicals against the arsenite induced DNA damage in normal 
mammalian V79 cells. Comet assay was used for assessment of DNA damage and 2', 
7'-dichlorofluorescein dihydroacetate for estimation of ROS generated by 
arsenite. The effect of the phytochemicals was observed during simultaneous 
treatment with arsenic, before arsenite exposure and during repair experiments. 
Of all the phytochemicals tested against arsenic, curcumin gave better 
protection during simultaneous treatment and resveratrol during pre treatment, 
which was evident both from comet assay and ROS generation experiments. During 
pre treatment a longer duration of treatment with lower dose of phytochemicals 
proved fruitful in reducing the genotoxicity. During repair experiments the 
phytochemicals enhanced recovery of DNA damage and ellagic acid gave promising 
results. The results indicated that natural phytochemicals may have the efficacy 
in reducing arsenic induced genotoxicity, in scavenging ROS and in enhancing the 
process of DNA repair in V79 cells.

PMID: 19024166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Am Coll Nutr. 2014;33(1):55-62. doi: 10.1080/07315724.2014.870008.

Efficacy and safety of the dietary supplement DBCare® in patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus and inadequate glycemic control.

Rotman-Pikielny P(1), Ness-Abramof R, Charach G, Roitman A, Zissin R, Levy Y.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Medicine E , Meir Medical Center , Kfar Saba , Israel.

AIMS: DBCare® (Ace Continental Exports Inc., London, UK) is a traditional Indian 
herbal food supplement marketed as an antidiabetes remedy. This study evaluated 
the efficacy and safety of DBCare in patients with inadequately controlled type 
2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) despite oral hypoglycemic treatment.
METHODS: A 12-week randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial was 
conducted. Patients with T2DM on oral hypoglycemic agents with HbA1C > 7.0% were 
randomized to receive DBCare or placebo tablets.
RESULTS: Thirty-five patients (20 male/15 female; mean age 61.2 ± 7.6 years), 
with a mean baseline HbA1C of 7.9% ± 0.6%, received DBCare (N = 18) or placebo 
(N = 17). During the study period, HbA1C declined 0.4 ± 0.7% in the DBCare® 
group and 0.2% ± 0.8% in the placebo group (p = 0.806). No significant changes 
occurred in fasting plasma glucose, lipid profile, or homeostasis model 
assessment throughout the study or in body mass index, waist circumference, or 
blood pressure values. Hypoglycemic episodes (glucose < 70 mg/dL) were more 
frequent in the treatment group (7 vs 1, p = 0.043), necessitating a decrease in 
other hypoglycemic medications in 2 patients. DBCare was generally well 
tolerated, with mild side effects that were not different from those of the 
placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: This preliminary study did not demonstrate that DBCare was 
efficacious in improving glycemic control in inadequately controlled patients 
with T2DM on oral hypoglycemics. A trend toward improved glycemic control was 
noted in the DBCare group, which correlates with more frequent hypoglycemic 
episodes. Further studies are needed to elucidate DBCare's hypoglycemic effect 
in patients with T2DM in general and in specific clinical settings, such as 
HbA1C ≥ 8%, short (≤10-year) duration of diabetes, or young age in particular.

DOI: 10.1080/07315724.2014.870008
PMID: 24533608 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1990 Apr;44(4):301-6.

Effect of fenugreek seeds on blood glucose and serum lipids in type I diabetes.

Sharma RD(1), Raghuram TC, Rao NS.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Nutrition, Indian Council of Medical Research, 
Hyderabad.

The effect of fenugreek seeds (Trigonella foenum graecum) on blood glucose and 
the serum lipid profile was evaluated in insulin-dependent (Type I) diabetic 
patients. Isocaloric diets with and without fenugreek were each given randomly 
for 10 d. Defatted fenugreek seed powder (100 g), divided into two equal doses, 
was incorporated into the diet and served during lunch and dinner. The fenugreek 
diet significantly reduced fasting blood sugar and improved the glucose 
tolerance test. There was a 54 per cent reduction in 24-h urinary glucose 
excretion. Serum total cholesterol, LDL and VLDL cholesterol and triglycerides 
were also significantly reduced. The HDL cholesterol fraction, however, remained 
unchanged. These results indicate the usefulness of fenugreek seeds in the 
management of diabetes.

PMID: 2194788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J R Soc Health. 1993 Aug;113(4):190-4. doi: 10.1177/146642409311300409.

Exploration of the frontiers of tradomedical practices: basis for development of 
alternative medical healthcare services in developing countries.

Osujih M(1).

Author information:
(1)Rivers State College of Education, Port Harcourt, Nigeria.

The study is a brief exploration of the functions and roles of the traditional 
healers in the total health care delivery system as a basis for tapping the 
salient features of this age old art: for the purpose of refining, and 
establishing it as an alternative medical health-care service. The investigation 
is considered relevant particularly in the developing countries where, in 
addition to the dearth of orthodox medical services, institutions and personnel, 
it is relatively cheaper, socio-culturally accessible and acceptable. Refining 
and developing some aspects of the traditional healers' services will serve the 
interest of the health consumers whose main concern is with service and not the 
source. Furthermore, it is hoped that the study will stimulate purposeful 
discussions on the need for an unbiased examination of the materials, methods 
and techniques of the traditional healers including, eventually, compiling a 
native pharmacopoeia. A more comprehensive account of the traditional healers 
contributions to the battle against diseases and maintenance of health and well 
being is envisaged.

PIP: In traditional healing, practitioners use barks, leaves, nuts, fruit juices 
and roots, and parts of domestic animals. They practice their craft mostly in 
Africa, Asia, and other Third World countries, and they are variously called 
juju priests, diviners, herbalists, and witch doctors. Cases of achievements in 
their contributions to preventive and curative health have been documented. In 
Nigeria, clients regularly patronize both orthodox and traditional medical 
practitioners. Their remedies include healing the bite of the very poisonous 
carpet viper, chronic bronchitis, peptic ulcer, and heart problems, as well as 
performing uvulectomy and tonsillectomy. Quinine, the cure for malaria, was 
originally the ritual medicine of the Incas of Peru. It was confirmed that 
Azadirachta Indica (Meliaceae), the neem tree, used against malaria in Nigeria, 
India, and Asia, had a potent antiplasmodial activity. The plant Streblus asper, 
Linn (Shakhotoha Siora) is well known in Indian Ayurvedic medicine to treat 
fever, filariasis, dysentery, and diarrhea. The alkaloids derived from the 
Madagascan periwinkle Catharanthus roseus (Apocynaceae), used in a West Indian 
remedy for diabetes mellitus, have antitumor activity. The drug Maytensine, 
obtained from Mytenus ovatus Loes (Celastraceae), was found to be a powerful 
antitumor agent in animals. Tea made from the leaves of Osyris wightiana 
stimulated the flow of breast milk and also acted as a labor-inducing agent. 
Saponaria officinalis and Enterobbium cyclocarpum are both used in Egypt and 
Tanzania as spermicide contraceptives. A 1985 survey in Cross River State, 
Nigeria, demonstrated that 165 (61%) of respondents went to traditional healers 
for treatment. Part of their continued popularity is the person-centered 
approach that is virtually lacking in orthodox hospitals, although this 
humanistic approach to therapy is gradually gaining inroads into Western medical 
education. The services of both kinds of medicine could be harmonized by 
open-minded appraisal, identification of positive aspects, and acceptance of 
their complimentary nature.

DOI: 10.1177/146642409311300409
PMID: 8410912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Low Extrem Wounds. 2004 Sep;3(3):143-50. doi: 10.1177/1534734604268385.

Wound healing potential of Pterocarpus santalinus linn: a pharmacological 
evaluation.

Biswas TK(1), Maity LN, Mukherjee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Sharira Kriya, J. B. Roy State Ayurvedic Medical College and 
Hospital, Kolkata, India.

The need for new therapeutics for wound healing has encouraged the drive to 
examine the nature and value of plant products. Ayurveda, the Indian traditional 
system of medicine, mentions the values of medicinal plants for wound healing. 
One of these is Pterocarpus santalinus. This article describes a pharmacological 
study to evaluate its toxicity as well as wound-healing potential in animal 
studies. Powder made from the wood of the P. santalinus tree was used to make up 
an ointment in a petroleum jelly base. No toxic effects were observed in 72 
hours. Studies were done on punch and burn wound models on normal and diabetic 
rats using the test ointment, untreated and vehicle controls, and standard 
therapy. Physical and biochemical measurements were made. The test 
ointment-treated wounds healed significantly faster. On healing, collagenesis 
and biochemical measurements yielded supportive data. These studies permit the 
conclusion that the P. santalinus ointment is safe and effective in treating 
acute wounds in animal models.

DOI: 10.1177/1534734604268385
PMID: 15866805


138. Indian J Exp Biol. 2008 Aug;46(8):614-6.

Hypoglycemic potential of Morus indica. L and Costus igneus. Nak.--a preliminary 
study.

Devi VD(1), Urooj A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Studies in Food Science and Nutrition, University of Mysore, 
Manasagangotri, Mysore 570 006, India.

Powdered leaves (500 mg/kg body weight) of medicinal plants M. indica and C. 
igneus known to possess therapeutic effect were supplemented to streptozotocin 
induced diabetic rats. Leaf powders of both the plants were able to reduce blood 
glucose levels in the animals by 38 and 21% respectively after 15 days of 
supplementation. The preliminary results suggest that both the plants possess 
potent hypoglycemic activity.

PMID: 18814491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1983 Jul-Sep;27(3):257-8.

Hypoglycaemic activity of an indigenous drug (Gymnema sylvestre, 'Gurmar') in 
normal and diabetic persons.

Khare AK, Tondon RN, Tewari JP.

PMID: 6668058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. 2008 May;30(4):301-5. doi: 
10.1358/mf.2008.30.4.1186073.

Hypoglycaemic activity of Bixa orellana extract in the dog.

Russell KR(1), Omoruyi FO, Pascoe KO, Morrison EY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Biochemistry Section, University of the 
West Indies, Mona, Kingston, Jamaica, West Indies.

In West Indian folklore, a variety of plants are used for medicinal purposes. 
One such plant, Bixa orellana (annatto), is commonly used in the treatment of 
diabetes mellitus. Preliminary studies have shown that a crude annatto seed 
extract exhibited either glucose lowering or hyperglycaemia-inducing activity 
depending on how it was further manipulated. This present investigation sought 
to determine the effects of the glucose-lowering extract on C-peptide and 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic dogs. This annatto extract was found to decrease 
blood glucose levels in fasting normoglycaemic and streptozotocin-induced 
diabetic dogs. In addition, in normal dogs, it suppressed the postprandial rise 
in blood glucose after an oral glucose load. Interestingly, the extract also 
caused an increase in insulin-to-glucose ratio in normal dogs. Increased insulin 
levels were not due to increased insulin synthesis as after 1-h residence time 
and half-hour postprandial, decreased C-peptide levels was observed. It was 
concluded that Bixa orellana (annatto) lowered blood glucose by stimulating 
peripheral utilization of glucose, and it is possible that this glucose-lowering 
extract might be of pharmacological importance.

Copyright 2008 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/mf.2008.30.4.1186073
PMID: 18773125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Eur J Med Chem. 2015 Mar 26;93:564-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.02.027. Epub 
2015 Feb 20.

Synthesis, docking and ADMET studies of novel chalcone triazoles for anti-cancer 
and anti-diabetic activity.

Chinthala Y(1), Thakur S(1), Tirunagari S(1), Chinde S(2), Domatti AK(3), 
Arigari NK(1), K V N S S(1), Alam S(4), Jonnala KK(5), Khan F(4), Tiwari A(3), 
Grover P(2).

Author information:
(1)Natural Product Chemistry, CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic 
Plants-Research Centre, Boduppal, Hyderabad 500092, India.
(2)Toxicology Unit, Biology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Hyderabad 500007, India.
(3)Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacology Division, CSIR-Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 500007, India.
(4)Metabolic and Structural Biology Department, CSIR-CIMAP, Lucknow 226015, UP, 
India.
(5)Natural Product Chemistry, CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic 
Plants-Research Centre, Boduppal, Hyderabad 500092, India. Electronic address: 
koteshkumarj@yahoo.com.

A series of novel chalcone-triazole derivatives were synthesized and screened 
for in vitro anticancer activity on the human cancer cell lines IMR32 
(neuroblastoma), HepG2 (hepatoma) and MCF-7 (breast adenocarcinoma), DU-145 
(prostate carcinoma), and A549 (lung adenocarcinoma). Among the tested 
compounds, 4r showed the most promising anticancer activity in all the cell 
lines whereas, compounds 4c (IC50 65.86 μM), 4e (IC50 66.28 μM), 4o (IC50 
35.81 μM), 4q (IC50 50.82 μM) and 4s (IC50 48.63 μM) showed better activity than 
the standard doxorubicin (IC50 69.33 μM) in A549 cell line alone. Rat intestinal 
α-glucosidase inhibitory activity of the synthesized derivatives showed 4m (IC50 
67.77 μM), 4p (IC50 74.94 in μM) and 4s (IC50 102.10 μM) as most active compared 
to others. The in silico docking of synthesized derivatives 4a-4t with DNA 
topoisomerase IIα revealed the LibDock score in the range of 71.2623-118.29 
whereas, compounds 4h, 4m, 4p and 4s with docking target α-glucosidase were in 
the range of 100.372-107.784.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2015.02.027
PMID: 25743216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Indian J Exp Biol. 1982 Mar;20(3):232-5.

Effects of bittergourd (Momordica charantia) seed & glibenclamide in 
streptozotocin induced diabetes mellitus.

Kedar P, Chakrabarti CH.

PMID: 6811427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1998 Jul;42(3):401-6.

Hypoglycemic effect of Biophytum sensitivum in the alloxan diabetic rabbits.

Puri D(1), Baral N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, B. P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, 
Dharan, Nepal.

Hypoglycaemic effect of a Neapalese plant Biophytum sensitivum was investigated 
in the alloxan diabetic male rabbits of different severities: subdiabetic 
(Alloxan recovered; AR), mild diabetic (MD) and severely diabetic (SD). 
Assessment of activity of the extract, prepared from the plant leaves, was done 
by fall in fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and improvement in the oral glucose 
tolerance test (OGTT), following single dose and prolonged administrations. 
Following single dose administration there was fall in 1 hour and 2.5 hour 
glucose values by 25.9% and 27.4% respectively in the subdiabetic rabbits, and 
by 36.9% and 37.7% in the mild diabetic rabbits. Improved GTT response is shown 
by fall in area under curve (AUC) from 16138 mg/dl to 12355 mg/dl (23.4%) in the 
subdiabetic rabbits, and from 19258 to 12238 mg/dl in the MD rabbits. More 
significant improvements occurred following one week of above treatment. The 
results prove that the plant material has significant hypoglycaemic effect, 
which is possibly due to pancreatic beta-cell stimulating action. To investigate 
its possible role in correction of other metabolic abnormalities of diabetes 
further long term studies are required.

PMID: 9741656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Indian J Med Res. 1964 Feb;52:200-7.

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES ON PITUITARY DIABETES. IV. EFFECT OF GYMNEMA SYLVESTRE AND 
COCCINIA INDICA AGAINST THE HYPERGLYCAEMIC RESPONSE OF SOMATOTROPIN AND 
CORTICOTROPIN HORMONES.

GUPTA SS, VARIYAR MC.

PMID: 14122605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1999 Oct;43(4):510-4.

Hypoglycaemic and anti-oxidant activity of Salacia oblonga Wall. extract in 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Krishnakumar K(1), Augusti KT, Vijayammal PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kerala, Kariavattom, 
Thiruvananthapuram.

The petroleum ether extract of the root bark of S. oblonga Wall. (Celastraceae) 
(SOB) was studied in streptozotocin (STZ) diabetic rats and anti-lipid 
peroxidative activity of the same was studied in the cardiac tissue. SOB 
prevented significantly the streptozotocin-induced hyperglycaemia and 
hypoinsulinaemia. It also produced a significant decrease in peroxidation 
products viz. thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (P < 0.001), conjugated 
dienes (P < 0.05), hydroperoxides (P < 0.001). The activity of antioxidant 
enzymes such as superoxide dismutase (P < 0.001), catalase (P < 0.001), GSHPxase 
and GSSGRase was found to be increased in the heart tissue of diabetic animals 
treated with SOB. These results suggest that S. oblonga root bark extract 
possesses anti-diabetic and anti-oxidative activity in streptozotocin-diabetic 
rats.

PMID: 10776471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1998 Jul;42(3):423-4.

Therapeutic potentials of fenugreek.

Puri D.

PMID: 9741661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. 2009 Nov;31(9):571-84. doi: 
10.1358/mf.2009.31.9.1435645.

Diabetic therapeutic effects of ethyl acetate fraction from the roots of Musa 
paradisiaca and seeds of Eugenia jambolana in streptozotocin-induced male 
diabetic rats.

Panda DK(1), Ghosh D, Bhat B, Talwar SK, Jaggi M, Mukherjee R.

Author information:
(1)Central Indian Pharmacopoeia Laboratory (Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
Govt of India), Rajnagar, Ghaziabad, U.P., India.

The folklore medicine of primitive people has been greatly appreciated for 
centuries. Many researchers study the curative efficiency and mode of action of 
various medicinal plants. Serum glucose level, lipid profile, glucose tolerance, 
hepatic and muscle glycogen contents as well as the activities of hepatic 
hexokinase and glucose-6-phosphatase recovered significantly after oral 
administration of ethyl acetate fractions of Eugenia jambolana (E. jambolana) or 
Musa paradisiaca (M. paradisiaca) in separate (E. jambolana L.: 200 mg/kg of 
body weight and M. paradisiaca: 100 mg/kg of body weight) or combined form for 
90 days (twice a day through gavage) to streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. 
The loss in body weight of diabetic animals was reversed and serum levels of 
insulin as well as C-peptide, which were found to be reduced in diabetic rats, 
increased significantly after oral administration of the fractions. A 
histological study of the rats' pancreas revealed that after 90 days of oral 
treatment with the plant fractions in separate or combined form, the size and 
volume of pancreatic islets in diabetic treated rats increased significantly 
compared with the diabetic control group. Treatment of diabetic rats with the 
combined dose (300 mg/kg of body weight) of plant fractions (200 mg E. jambolana 
and 100 mg M. paradisiaca) was found to be more effective than treatment with 
the individual fraction. The doses of E. jambolana and M. paradisiaca selected 
for this study are the optimum antihyperglycemic doses of the plant fractions, 
which were determined after conducting a dose-dependent study at various dose 
levels (50-500 mg/kg) in our pilot experiments. The plant fractions were found 
to be free from metabolic toxicity. Through HPTLC finger printing, three 
different compounds were noted in the ethyl acetate fraction of E. jambolana L. 
and eight different compounds in the ethyl acetate fraction of M. paradisiaca L.

Copyright 2009 Prous Science, S.A.U. or its licensors. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1358/mf.2009.31.9.1435645
PMID: 20094640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Indian J Med Sci. 1972 Apr;26(4):269-70.

Effect of curcumin on blood sugar as seen in a diabetic subject.

Srinivasan M.

PMID: 4637293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1983 Apr-Jun;27(2):135-40.

Effects of jambolan seed treatment on blood sugar, lipids and urea in 
streptozotocin induced diabetes in rabbits.

Kedar P, Chakrabarti CH.

In New Zealand rabbits a single intravenous injection of streptozotocin (STZ 65 
mg/kg) elevated the levels of blood sugar to 340 mg percent, which was 
associated with glycolysis, ureamia, hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia 
and loss of body weight. Oral administration of jambolan seed (1 g/kg) in casein 
diet significantly lowered the elevated postmeal (1 1/2 hr after) values of 
blood sugar, cholesterol, FFA and triglyceride down to levels comparable to 
phenformin. Jambolan seed treatment failed to check ureamia. Weight loss was 
checked by phenformin and jambolan seed but the gain was not equivalent to that 
recorded in nondiabetic control. Like phenformin, jambolan seed too failed to 
control glycogenolysis in STZ-induced diabetes.

PMID: 6885126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Phytother Res. 2005 Apr;19(4):277-81. doi: 10.1002/ptr.1491.

Free radical scavenging, enzyme inhibitory constituents from antidiabetic 
Ayurvedic medicinal plant Hydnocarpus wightiana Blume.

Reddy SV(1), Tiwari AK, Kumar US, Rao RJ, Rao JM.

Author information:
(1)Natural Products Laboratory, Division of Organic Chemistry-I, Indian 
Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, India.

Hydnocarpus wightiana is advocated in traditional Indian medicine to possess 
strong antidiabetic activity. In the course of identifying bioactive fractions 
from Indian medicinal plants we observed that acetone extract of the seed hulls 
of H. wightiana possess strong free radicals (DPPH and ABTS) scavenging, 
alpha-glucosidase and moderate N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitory 
activities. Further fractionation of the extract led to the isolation of 
hydnocarpin, luteolin and isohydnocarpin in substantial yields. All the 
compounds showed strong ABTS scavenging property. However, only luteolin could 
display strong DPPH scavenging activity. Furthermore, all the three compounds 
also showed varying degrees of alpha-glucosidase and 
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitory activity, luteolin being the 
superior. The kinetics of alpha-glucosidase inhibition by these compounds showed 
that acetone extract inhibits the enzyme in competitive manner however, luteolin 
and isohydnocarpin showed mixed-type inhibition. This is the first report 
assigning hydnocarpin and isohydnocarpin free radical scavenging, 
alpha-glucosidase and N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitory properties and 
luteolin as N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitor. This study suggests that 
presence of amphiphilic antioxidant molecules along with enzyme inhibitory 
activities in the acetone extract of H. wightiana seed hulls may be responsible 
for the antidiabetic properties as advocated in traditional medicine.

(c) 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ptr.1491
PMID: 16041766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Phytomedicine. 2013 Feb 15;20(3-4):246-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2012.11.006. 
Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Anti-diabetic property of Tinospora cordifolia and its active compound is 
mediated through the expression of Glut-4 in L6 myotubes.

Sangeetha MK(1), Priya CD, Vasanthi HR.

Author information:
(1)Herbal and Indian Medicine Research Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, 
Sri Ramachandra University, Chennai, India.

Tinospora cordifolia is a well reported plant possessing numerous medicinal 
values including anti-diabetic property. Aim of the present study is to study 
the mechanism of action of Tinospora cordifolia and its active compound in 
differentiated myocytes, L6 cells. Key marker of diabetes in cells is the 
insulin dependent glucose transporter-4 (Glut-4) which also responds to 
exogenous chemicals, and is over expressed up to 5- and 4-fold, by Tinospora 
cordifolia and palmatine, respectively. Next to Glut-4, the predominant protein 
influencing glucose metabolism is PPARα and γ whose expressions were also 
positively modulated. Further, the inhibitors of insulin pathway prevented 
glucose uptake mediated by Tinospora cordifolia and palmatine which shows that 
the activity is majorly mediated through insulin pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2012.11.006
PMID: 23290487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Indian J Exp Biol. 1996 Jun;34(6):600-2.

Kinetic studies of purified malate dehydrogenase in liver of 
streptozotocin-diabetic rats and the effect of leaf extract of Aegle marmelose 
(L.) Correa ex Roxb.

Seema PV(1), Sudha B, Padayatti PS, Abraham A, Raghu KG, Paulose CS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Cochin University of Science and Technology, 
India.

The functional basis of diabetes-mellitus to a certain extent, can be elucidated 
by studying diabetes-induced changes in metabolic enzymes. Malate dehydrogenase 
(MDH), is an enzyme directly involved in glucose metabolism. The kinetic 
parameters of MDH and its purified cytosolic isozyme, S-MDH, have been studied 
in the liver of streptozotocin-diabetic rats; also the potential of the leaf 
extract of A. marmelose as an anti-diabetic agent was investigated. The Km of 
the liver enzyme increased significantly, in both crude and purified 
preparations in the diabetic state when compared to the respective controls. 
Insulin as well as leaf-extract treatment of the diabetic rats brought about a 
reversal of Km values to near normal. Vmax of purified S-MDH was significantly 
higher in the diabetic state when compared to the control. Insulin and leaf 
extract treatment did not reverse this change. Since MDH is an important enzyme 
in glucose metabolism, the variation in its quantitative and qualitative nature 
may contribute to the pathological status of diabetes. The fact that leaf 
extract of A. marmelose was found to be as effective as insulin in restoration 
of blood glucose and body weight to normal levels, the use of A. marmelose as 
potential hypoglycemic agent is suggested.

PMID: 8792652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Indian J Exp Biol. 1993 May;31(5):474-5.

Hypoglycaemic activity of arecoline in betel nut Areca catechu L.

Chempakam B(1).

Author information:
(1)Central Plantation Crops Research Institute, Regional Station, Vittal, India.

PMID: 8359856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Curr Pharm Des. 2020 Jun 25. doi: 10.2174/1381612826666200625111530. Online 
ahead of print.

Unmasking the Many Faces of Giloy (Tinospora cordifolia L.): A fresh look on its 
phytochemical and medicinal properties.

Verma DK(1), Goyal K(2), Kumar P(2), El-Shazly M(3).

Author information:
(1)Agricultural and Food Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology 
Kharagpur - 721302, West Bengal. India.
(2)Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Sant Longowal Institute of 
Engineering and Technology Longowal, Sangrur - 148106, Punjab. India.
(3)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ain-Shams University, 
Organization of African Unity Street, Abassia, Cairo 11566. Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Plants have been used to treat health disorders and prevent diseases 
since antiquity in all civilizations including the Indian and Chinse 
civilizations. Giloy (Tinospora cordifolia L.) is one of the most important 
medicinal plants in Indian folk medicine and is commonly known as the 
"Heart-leaved Moonseed" or "Guduchi". Giloy is a perennial shrubby creeper of 
the family Menispermaceae. It is native to the tropical areas of India, Sri 
Lanka, Myanmar, Sothern Eastern Asia, Africa, and Australia. It attracted 
attention in the last few decades because its roots, stems, and leaves are used 
in folk medicine treating several disorders.
METHODS: To reveal its potential, we reviewed the literature on this plant over 
the last five decades using several search engines.
RESULTS: Giloy is recommended in diabetes, stomachache, jaundice, urinary 
problems, skin ailments, and prolonged diarrhea and dysentery. The medicinal 
properties of T. cordifolia extracts were attributed to its phytochemical 
content including steroids, alkaloids, diterpenoid lactones, and glycosides.
CONCLUSION: In this review, we summarized the phytochemical content of T. 
cordifolia and its medicinal properties with special emphasis on its 
antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and cytotoxic activities. We aimed to provide 
natural product researchers with a full picture of the potential applications of 
this plant in the development of food additives and nutraceuticals.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612826666200625111530
PMID: 32586250


155. Indian J Exp Biol. 2000 Jun;38(6):607-9.

Hypoglycemic, diuretic and hypocholesterolemic effect of winter cherry (Withania 
somnifera, Dunal) root.

Andallu B(1), Radhika B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Home Science, Sri Satya Sai Institute of Higher Learning, 
Anantapur 515001, India.

Hypoglycemic, diuretic and hypocholesterolemic effects of roots of W. somnifera 
(ashvagandha) were assessed on human subjects. Six mild NIDDM subjects and six 
mild hypercholesterolemic subjects were treated with the powder of roots of W. 
somnifera for 30 days. Suitable parameters were studied in the blood and urine 
samples of the subjects along with dietary pattern before and at the end of 
treatment period. Decrease in blood glucose was comparable to that of an oral 
hypoglycemic drug. Significant increase in urine sodium, urine volume, 
significant decrease in serum cholesterol, triglycerides, LDL (low density 
lipoproteins) and VLDL (very low density lipoproteins) cholesterol were observed 
indicating that root of W. somnifera is a potential source of hypoglycemic, 
diuretic and hypocholesterolemic agents. Clinical observations revealed no 
adverse effects.

PMID: 11116534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 1973 Sep;10(3):209-12.

Studies on the effect of allicin (diallyl disulphide-oxide) on alloxan diabetes. 
I. Hypoglycaemic action and enhancement of serum insulin effect and glycogen 
synthesis.

Mathew PT, Augusti KT.

PMID: 4792931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Indian J Exp Biol. 1999 Feb;37(2):200-2.

Effects of vanadate, insulin and fenugreek (Trigonella foenum graecum) on 
creatine kinase levels in tissues of diabetic rat.

Genet S(1), Kale RK, Baquer NZ.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

The in vivo effects of insulin, and other insulino mimetic agents like vanadate 
and fenugreek (T. foenum graecum) were followed on the changes in the activities 
of creatine kinase in heart, skeletal muscle and liver of experimental diabetic 
rats. As compared to control rats, creatine kinase activities were found to 
decrease significantly in the tissues during experimental diabetes. All the 
antidiabetic compounds used namely, insulin, vanadate and Fenugreek seed powder 
normalised the decreased activities to almost control values. The effects of 
insulin and vanadate were comparable in restoring normoglycemia and the creatine 
kinase activities.

PMID: 10641147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1970 Apr;14(2):65-76.

Recent research in indigenous anti-diabetic medicinal plants--an over-all 
assessment.

Aiman R.

PMID: 5509018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Dec;62:722-31. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.09.035. Epub 2013 
Oct 15.

Modulation of liver function, antioxidant responses, insulin resistance and 
glucose transport by Oroxylum indicum stem bark in STZ induced diabetic rats.

Singh J(1), Kakkar P.

Author information:
(1)Herbal Research Section, CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Post 
Box No. 80, Mahatma Gandhi Marg, Lucknow 226001, UP, India.

A decoction of stem bark of Oroxylum indicum Vent. (OI) is taken (2-3 times/day) 
by the tribal people of Sikkim, India to treat diabetes but scientific 
validation of its overall potential is lacking. Present study was aimed to 
assess in vitro antihyperglycemic activity of standardized OI extract using 
inhibition of α-glucosidase, BSA glycation and enhancement of insulin 
sensitivity. Antidiabetic and antioxidant modulatory effects of OI extract along 
with the blood biomarkers of toxic response were studied in streptozotocin (STZ) 
induced diabetic rats. In vitro analysis showed strong antioxidant capacity of 
OI -and potential to inhibit BSA glycation and α-glucosidase activity which was 
comparable to standard counterparts. Extract also improved insulin sensitivity 
in mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes. In vivo effects of OI extract (oral 250 mg/kg 
b.wt.) on STZ induced type II diabetic rats normalized the antioxidant status 
(p≤0.01). Analysis of blood biomarkers of toxic response indicated its safety. 
Lowering of total cholesterol and HDL levels (p≤0.05) and restoration of 
glycated Hb (p≤0.01) were also found in OI treated diabetic rats. HOMA-IR, 
QUICKI analysis along with area under the curve analysis showed the capacity of 
OI extract to enhance the insulin sensitivity significantly (p≤0.01) which was 
confirmed by increased GLUT-4 translocation in skeletal muscles.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.09.035
PMID: 24140466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Indian J Exp Biol. 1992 Jun;30(6):523-6.

Antidiabetic effects of S-allyl cysteine sulphoxide isolated from garlic Allium 
sativum Linn.

Sheela CG(1), Augusti KT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, India.

S-allyl cysteine sulphoxide (SACS), a sulphur containing amino acid of garlic 
which is the precursor of allicin and garlic oil, has been found to show 
significant antidiabetic effects in alloxan diabetic rats. Administration of it 
at a dose of 200 mg/kg body weight decreased significantly the concentration of 
serum lipids, blood glucose and activities of serum enzymes like alkaline 
phosphatase, acid phosphatase and lactate dehydrogenase and liver 
glucose-6-phosphatase. It increased significantly liver and intestinal HMG CoA 
reductase activity and liver hexokinase activity.

PMID: 1506036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1969 Jul;13(3):189-90.

Hypoglycaemic effects of Bambusa dendrocalamus.

Bapat SK, Ansari KU, Candra V.

PMID: 5362635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Ethnopharmacol. 1998 May;61(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(98)00002-6.

Hypoglycaemic activity of Syzigium cumini seeds: effect on lipid peroxidation in 
alloxan diabetic rats.

Prince PS(1), Menon VP, Pari L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Annamalai University, Tamil Nadu, India.

Syzigium cumini, commonly known as 'jamun', is widely used in Indian folk 
medicine for the treatment of diabetes mellitus. Oral administration of 2.5 and 
5.0 g/kg body weight of the aqueous extract of the seed for 6 weeks resulted in 
a significant reduction in blood glucose and an increase in total haemoglobin, 
but in the case of 7.5 g/kg body weight the effect was not significant. It also 
prevents decrease in body weight. The aqueous extract also resulted in decreased 
free radical formation in tissues studied. Thus the study shows that Jamun seed 
extract (JSEt) has hypoglycaemic action. The decrease in thiobarbituric acid 
reactive substances (TBARS) and increase in reduced glutathione (GSH), 
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) clearly show the antioxidant 
property of the JSEt. The effect of JSEt was most prominently seen in the case 
of animals given 5.0 g/kg body weight. JSEt was more effective than 
glibenclamide.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-8741(98)00002-6
PMID: 9687076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Phytomedicine. 2006 Jun;13(6):434-41. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2005.03.008. Epub 
2005 Nov 2.

In vitro glucose uptake activity of Aegles marmelos and Syzygium cumini by 
activation of Glut-4, PI3 kinase and PPARgamma in L6 myotubes.

Anandharajan R(1), Jaiganesh S, Shankernarayanan NP, Viswakarma RA, Balakrishnan 
A.

Author information:
(1)Centre For Biotechnology, Anna University, Chennai 600025, India.

The purpose of the present study is to investigate the effect of methanolic 
extracts of Aegles marmelos and Syzygium cumini on a battery of targets glucose 
transporter (Glut-4), peroxisome proliferator activator receptor gamma 
(PPARgamma) and phosphatidylinositol 3' kinase (PI3 kinase) involved in glucose 
transport. A. marmelos and S. cumini are anti-diabetic medicinal plants being 
used in Indian traditional medicine. Different solvent extracts extracted 
sequentially were analysed for glucose uptake activity at each step and methanol 
extracts were found to be significantly active at 100ng/ml dose comparable with 
insulin and rosiglitazone. Elevation of Glut-4, PPARgamma and PI3 kinase by A. 
marmelos and S. cumini in association with glucose transport supported the 
up-regulation of glucose uptake. The inhibitory effect of cycloheximide on A. 
marmelos- and S. cumini-mediated glucose uptake suggested that new protein 
synthesis is required for the elevated glucose transport. Current observation 
concludes that methanolic extracts of A. marmelos and S. cumini activate glucose 
transport in a PI3 kinase-dependent fashion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2005.03.008
PMID: 16716914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006 Nov 24;108(2):228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.05.018. 
Epub 2006 May 26.

In vitro anti-proliferative and antioxidant studies on Devil's Club Oplopanax 
horridus.

Tai J(1), Cheung S, Cheah S, Chan E, Hasman D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Pediatrics, Center for Complementary Medicine 
Research, BC Child and Family Research Institute, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. jtai@interchange.ubc.ca

Devil's Club, Oplopanax horridus (OH), is a widely used folk medicine in Alaska 
and British Columbia for treating a variety of ailments including arthritis, 
fever and diabetes. HPLC profiling shows that numerous compounds are present in 
the 70% ethanolic extract of OH dry root bark powder. OH extract inhibited K562, 
HL60, MCF7 and MDA-MB-468 cell growth with the 50% inhibition (IC(50)) estimated 
at 1/2700, 1/1700, 1/500 and 1/2500 dilutions, respectively. Non-cytotoxic 
concentrations (<IC(50)) of OH extract combined with non-cytotoxic 
concentrations (<IC(50)) of camptothecin (CAM) or paclitaxel (PTX) were tested 
on the tumor cell lines. Of the 19 combinations tested, 9 showed additive or 
synergistic anti-proliferative effect while the rest showed antagonistic effect. 
Combination of OH extract at 1/4000 and 1/16,000 dilutions with 0.1 microM of 
CAM produced additive, anti-proliferative effects on K562 cells, as did 1/2000 
and 1/1000 dilutions of OH combined with 2.5 nM of PTX on MCF7, and 1/4000 
dilution of OH with 1 nM of PTX on MDA-MB-468 cells. Combination of 1/8000 and 
1/4000 dilution of OH with 0.05 microM of CAM showed strong synergistic 
anti-proliferative effects on HL60 cells. At non-cytotoxic 1/4000 dilution, OH 
induced 13.1% of HL60 cells to differentiate into granulocytes but had no effect 
on monocyte/macrophage differentiation. A cell free hydroxyl radical scavenging 
assay estimated that OH at 1/100, 1/10 and 1/5 dilutions showed activities 
equivalent to 2.7, 15.7 and 25.6 microM of Trolox, respectively. At 
non-cytotoxic 1/4000 and 1/2000 dilutions, OH significantly reduced nitric oxide 
production by lipopolysaccharide activated RAW 264.7 cells (p<0.001). Our data 
show that the ethanolic extract of OH has anti-proliferative on several cancer 
cell lines, and has strong antioxidant activity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2006.05.018
PMID: 16814500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Indian J Med Res. 1985 Jan;81:86-91.

Hypoglycaemic activity of Hamiltonia suaveolens.

Desai AC, Bhide MB.

PMID: 3988335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Indian J Med Res. 1960 Mar;48:162-8.

The relationship of the post-absorptive state to the hypoglycemic action studies 
on Ficus bengalensis and Ficus glomerata.

SHROTRI DS, AIMAN R.

PMID: 14446232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Indian J Dent Res. 2001 Jan-Mar;12(1):7-20.

Visceral organ involvement is infrequent in oral submucous fibrosis (OSF).

Rajendra R(1), George B, Sivakaran S, Narendranathan N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Govt. Dental College, 
Department of Cardiology, SCTIMST, and Department of Gastroenterology, Medical 
College, Trivandrum, India. Inforec@md2.vsnl.net.in

Associated visceral organ involvement evidence by systemic fibrosis has not been 
explored in oral submucous fibrosis (OSF). The investigations in this aspect 
were limited to loco-regional sites of naso/oropharynx and oesophagus. The study 
of whether the oral fibrosis is part of a systemic spectrum of disease involving 
multiple organs is an interesting pursuit. With this intention the patients 
diagnosed on clinical and histological grounds for OSF were concurrently tested 
by biophysical means for the presence of endomyocardial fibrosis (EMF), 
pancreatic (PF) and retroperitoneal fibrosis (RPF), which are endemic to the 
area studied. Twenty-five (n = 25) cases of OSF who visited the Department of 
Oral pathology & Microbiology. Govt. Dental College, Trivandrum, India for 
symptomatic relief of their illness comprised the study group. Ten (n = 10) age 
and sex matched healthy volunteers comprised the control. All the subjects have 
had undergone cardiologic and gastrointestinal investigations to rule out the 
possibility of concurrent EMF and PF. The patients were all of Indian ethnic 
extraction and mostly (> 90%) were from low socio economic classes. The mean age 
of the patients was 54.16 +/- 14.6 years, including 18 females and 7 males (F:M 
= 2.57:1). The severity of fibrosis was unrelated to the age of patients (P > 
0.05). All the patients were chewers of areca quid (12%)/tobacco (88%). In 
addition to quid chewing 3/25 (12%) patients smoked 'bidi' and 6/25 (24%) 
consumed home brewed liquor (arrack/toddy) which contain about 40-50% ethanol. 
Statistically no relationship was observed between the clinical stages of OSF 
and severity of epithelial dysplasia in this study (P > 0.05). Out of the 25 
patients, 5 (20%) showed sclerotic aortic value which may be an age related 
finding. Also 7 (28%) patients were found to be hypertensive and interstitial 
lung disease was present in 2 (8%). The possibility of EMF in one female patient 
who showed thickened RV apical endocardium was ruled out by cardiac 
catheterisation. Thus none of the patients showed evidence of endomyocardial 
fibrosis. The pancreas was found to be hyperchoic in 8(32 1/4) by ultra 
sonography. Liver was found to be hyperchoic in 6 (24%). Fat stain in stool 
samples was found to be positive in 13(58%). The hyperchogenecity of pancreas 
may be due to alcoholism or an underlying endocrine pancreatic insufficiency 
like diabetes and not due to pancreatic fibrosis. The positivity of fat stain 
could be due to fatty liver/alcoholism. Thus the study fails to reveal any 
evidence of pancreatic fibrosis in the group. The lack of any evidence of an 
associated visceral organ fibrosis in OSF made it prudent to believe that this 
is a loco-regional disease, initiated by local factors and propagated under 
their influence without systemic involvement.

PMID: 11441804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2003 Jul;69(1):61-6. doi: 
10.1016/s0952-3278(03)00057-7.

Daily prickly pear consumption improves platelet function.

Wolfram R(1), Budinsky A, Efthimiou Y, Stomatopoulos J, Oguogho A, Sinzinger H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Angiology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Prickly pear is traditionally used by Pima Indians as a dietary nutrient against 
diabetes mellitus. We examined the effect of daily consumption of 250 g in 8 
healthy volunteers and 8 patients with mild familial heterozygous 
hypercholesterolemia on various parameters of platelet function. Beside its 
action on lipids and lipoproteins, prickly pear consumption significantly 
reduced the platelet proteins (platelet factor 4 and beta-thromboglobulin), 
ADP-induced platelet aggregation and improved platelet sensitivity (against PGI2 
and PGE1) in volunteers as well as in patients. Also plasma 11-DH-TXB2 and the 
WU-test showed a significant improvement in both patients and volunteers. In 
contrast, collagen-induced platelet aggregation and the number of circulating 
endothelial cells showed a significant response in patients only. No influence 
of prickly pear ingestion on peripheral platelet count was monitored. The 
dietary run-in period did not influence any of the parameters of haemostasis 
examined. No sex difference was seen. Prickly pear may induce at least part of 
its beneficial actions on the cardiovascular system via decreasing platelet 
activity and thereby improving haemostatic balance.

DOI: 10.1016/s0952-3278(03)00057-7
PMID: 12878452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Indian J Med Res. 1987 Feb;85:184-7.

Effect of legumes on blood sugar in diabetes mellitus.

Dilawari JB, Kumar VK, Khurana S, Bhatnagar R, Dash RJ.

PMID: 3596686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Indian J Exp Biol. 1993 Jan;31(1):26-9.

Antidiabetic effects of a glycoside of leucopelargonidin isolated from Ficus 
bengalensis Linn.

Cherian S(1), Augusti KT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kerala, Thiruvananthapuram, India.

Glycoside of leucopelargonidin isolated from the bark of F. bengalensis 
demonstrated significant hypoglycemic, hypolipidemic and serum insulin raising 
effects in moderately diabetic rats with close similarities to the effects of a 
minimal dose of glibenclamide. The main difference observed in their effects was 
that the former significantly enhanced the fecal excretion of sterols and bile 
acids while the later has no such action even though both controlled 
hypercholesteremia.

PMID: 8500813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Indian J Exp Biol. 1999 Feb;37(2):193-5.

Effect of antidiabetic compounds on glyoxalase I activity in experimental 
diabetic rat liver.

Raju J(1), Gupta D, Rao AR, Baquer NZ.

Author information:
(1)Hormone and Drug Research Laboratory, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal 
Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

The activity of glyoxalase I from the soluble fraction of diabetic rat liver was 
found to decrease as compared to the control. Sodium orthovanadate in drinking 
water and Trigonella foenum graecum seed powder when administered to these 
diabetic animals were found to reverse the activity of glyoxalase I to control 
values. A combination of the above two antidiabetic compounds showed a better 
reversal. Vanadate and Trigonella seed powder treatment separately to diabetic 
rats also normalized hyperglycemia together with glyoxalase I activity. A 
combination of vanadate and Trigonella seed powder also restored the other 
general parameters of the diabetic animals.

PMID: 10641145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Indian J Exp Biol. 1981 Aug;19(8):715-21.

Studies on protein-bound polysaccharide components & glycosaminoglycans in 
experimental diabetes--effect of Gymnema sylvestre, R.Br.

Rathi AN, Visvanathan A, Shanmugasundaram KR.

PMID: 7309156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Gen Pharmacol. 1996 Apr;27(3):431-4. doi: 10.1016/0306-3623(95)02070-5.

Possible mechanism of antihyperglycemic effect of Azadirachta indica leaf 
extract. Part IV.

Chattopadhyay RR(1).

Author information:
(1)Biometry Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta, India.

1. Effect of epinephrine on the increment index calculated from intravenous 
glucose tolerance tests and on hepatic glycogen before and after A. indica leaf 
extract treatment was studied in normal and streptozotocin-induced diabetic 
rabbits. 2. A. indica leaf extract, in itself, was found to have no action on 
peripheral utilization of glucose or on hepatic glycogen. 3. The reduction in 
peripheral utilization of glucose and glycogenolytic effect due to epinephrine 
action was blocked by A. indica leaf extract, however, almost completely in 
diabetic rabbits and to a certain extent in normal ones. 4. The results are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0306-3623(95)02070-5
PMID: 8723520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Indian J Med Res. 1963 Jul;51:716-24.

EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES ON PITUITARY DIABETES. III. EFFECT OF INDIGENOUS 
ANTI-DIABETIC DRUGS AGAINST THE ACUTE HYPERGLYCAEMIC RESPONSE OF ANTERIOR 
PITUITARY EXTRACT IN GLUCOSE FED ALBINO RATS.

GUPTA SS.

PMID: 14073626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Ethnopharmacol. 1990 Apr;29(1):59-72. doi: 10.1016/0378-8741(90)90098-e.

Contemporary use of bark for medicine by two Salishan native elders of southeast 
Vancouver Island, Canada.

Turner NJ(1), Hebda RJ.

Author information:
(1)Botany Unit, Royal British Columbia Museum, Victoria, B.C., Canada.

Elders of the Saanich and Cowichan Coast Salish people of southern Vancouver 
Island treat, or have treated in the recent past, many ailments with bark 
preparations. Interviews with two elder Salishan women revealed that: 
respiratory ailments were treated with bark of Abies grandis, Arbutus menziesii, 
Cornus nuttallii, Prunus emarginata, Pseudotsuga menziesii and Quercus garryana; 
digestive tract ailments with the bark of Abies grandis, Alnus rubra, Arbutus 
menziesii, Malus fusca. Oemleria cerasiformis, Populus tremuloides, Pseudotsuga 
menziesii, Rhamnus purshianus and Rubus spectabilis; gynaecological problems 
with bark of Abies grandis, Arbutus menziesii, Populus tremuloides, Prunus 
emarginata, Pseudotsuga menziesii and Sambucus racemosa; and dermatological 
complaints with the bark of Mahonia spp., Rubus spectabilis, and Symphoricarpos 
albus. Tree barks have also been used to treat fevers, diabetes, kidney 
problems, sore eyes, and haemorrhaging, and also as general tonics. Two recipes 
for general-purpose multi-bark medicines are provided. In most cases, infusions 
or decoctions of barks are used. The medicines are drunk or applied externally 
as a wash.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-8741(90)90098-e
PMID: 2345461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Indian J Med Res. 1962 Sep;50:708-14.

Experimental studies on pituitary diabetes. II. Comparison of blood sugar level 
in normal and anterior pituitary extract-induced hyperglycaemic rats treated 
with a few Ayurvedic remedies.

GUPTA SS, SETH CB.

PMID: 13951327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Indian J Exp Biol. 1999 Feb;37(2):196-9.

Modulation of some gluconeogenic enzyme activities in diabetic rat liver and 
kidney: effect of antidiabetic compounds.

Gupta D(1), Raju J, Baquer NZ.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India.

The effects of insulin, sodium orthovanadate and a hypoglycemic plant material, 
Trigonella foenum graecum (fenugreek) seed powder were studied on the activities 
of glucose-6-phosphatase and fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase in diabetic liver and 
kidney. The significantly increased activities of the two enzymes during 
diabetes in liver and kidney were found to be lowered to almost control values 
by the use of the antidiabetic compounds. Diabetic liver exhibited a much 
greater increase in the activities of the two enzymes than diabetic kidney. The 
highest percentage of reversal to normal values was seen using the combination 
of vanadate and Trigonella seed powder. The lowered rate of growth of the 
animals as well as the increased blood sugar were reversed almost to the control 
levels by the Trigonella seed powder and vanadate treatment. The inclusion of 
the Trigonella seed powder overcame the toxicity of vanadium encountered when it 
was given alone as insulin mimetic agent. Much lower levels of vanadate were 
needed when it was given in combination with Trigonella seed powder. Their 
combined effects were better at restoring the above parameters than those 
induced by insulin administration.

PMID: 10641146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Indian J Exp Biol. 1999 Jul;37(7):662-6.

Reduced nociceptive responses in mice with alloxan induced hyperglycemia after 
garlic (Allium sativum Linn.) treatment.

Kumar GR(1), Reddy KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Osmania University, Hyderabad, India.

Administration of ethanol (95%) extract (45 mg/kg body wt/day for 28 days) of 
garlic (A. sativum) to alloxan induced diabetic (ALX-D) mice significantly 
lowered the serum glucose levels, nociceptive response in tail-flick, hotplate, 
allodynia, formalin test and relative thickness, weight of hind paw in formalin 
induced Paw oedema test, over 28 days, thus, showing the reversal trend in 
hyperglycemia and hyperalgesia compared to ALX-D mice. The reversal of 
hyperglycemia and hyperalgesia was progressive and more effective as duration of 
extract administration increased. The results suggest therapeutic potential of 
ethanol extract of garlic for anti-hyperglycemic and anti-nociceptive effects in 
diabetes.

PMID: 10522154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Indian J Exp Biol. 2001 Mar;39(3):284-6.

Hypoglycemic effect of Hibiscus rosa sinensis L. leaf extract in glucose and 
streptozotocin induced hyperglycemic rats.

Sachdewa A(1), Nigam R, Khemani LD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Dayalbagh Educational Institute, 
Agra, India.

Investigations were carried out to evaluate the effect of aqueous extract of H. 
rosa sinensis leaves on blood glucose level and glucose tolerance using Wistar 
rats. Repeated administration of the extract (once a day for seven consecutive 
days), at an oral dose equivalent to 250 mg kg(-1), significantly improved 
glucose tolerance in rats. The peak blood glucose level was obtained at 30 min 
of glucose load (2 g kg(-1)), thereafter a decreasing trend was recorded up to 
120 min. The data exhibit that repeated ingestion of the reference drug 
tolbutamide, a sulphonylurea and the extract brings about 2-3 fold decrease in 
blood glucose concentration as compared to single oral treatment. The results 
clearly indicate that tolbutamide improves the glucose tolerance by 91% and 
extract does so only by 47%. At 250 mg kg(-1), the efficacy of the extract was 
51.5% of tolbutamide (100mg kg(-1)). In streptozotocin diabetic rats, no 
significant effect was observed with the extract, while glibenclamide 
significantly lowered the glucose level up to 7 hr. These data suggest that 
hypoglycemic activity of H. rosa sinensis leaf extract is comparable to 
tolbutamide and not to glibenclamide treatment.

PMID: 11495291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Nutr. 2002 Jul;132(7):1819-24. doi: 10.1093/jn/132.7.1819.

Salacia reticulata and its polyphenolic constituents with lipase inhibitory and 
lipolytic activities have mild antiobesity effects in rats.

Yoshikawa M(1), Shimoda H, Nishida N, Takada M, Matsuda H.

Author information:
(1)Kyoto Pharmaceutical University, Misasagi, Yamashina-ku, Japan. 
shoyaku@mb.kyoto-phu.ac.jp

Salacia (S.) reticulata, a Hippocrateaceae plant distributed in Sri Lankan and 
Indian forests, has been used as a supplementary food in Japan to prevent 
obesity and diabetes. We examined the antiobesity effects of the hot 
water-soluble extract (SRHW) from the roots of S. reticulata using obese rat 
models and an in vitro study. Body weight (P = 0.07) and periuterine fat storage 
(P = 0.10) in female Zucker fatty rats (8-9 wk old) tended to be suppressed by 
oral administration of SRHW (125 mg/kg) for 27 d. Male rats fed a high fat diet 
were not affected by SRHW. Furthermore, SRHW inhibited porcine pancreatic lipase 
(PL), rat adipose tissue-derived lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and glycerophosphate 
dehydrogenase (GPDH) activities with 50% inhibitory concentrations (IC(50)) of 
264 (95% confidence limits: 203-393) mg/L, 15 (12-18) mg/L and 54 (35-85) mg/L, 
respectively, but did not inhibit hormone-sensitive lipase activity in rat 
adipose tissue. Next, we examined the effects of polyphenols, di- and 
triterpenes and salacinol isolated from the roots of S. reticulata on lipid 
metabolizing enzymes and lipolysis. (-)-Epigallocatechin and 
(-)-epicatechin-(4beta-->8)-(-)-4'-O-methylepigallocatechin inhibited PL 
activity with IC(50) of 88 (not calculated) and 68 (26-122) mg/L, respectively. 
(-)-Epicatechin, 3beta, 22beta-dihydroxyolean-12-en-29-oic acid and the tannin 
fraction inhibited LPL activity with IC(50) of 81 (54-214), 89 (62-214) and 35 
(24-62) mg/L. Only the tannin fraction inhibited GPDH activity with an IC(50) of 
6.8 (3.4-10.9) mg/L. These constituents may be involved in the lipase and GPDH 
inhibitory activities of SRHW. On the other hand, SRHW at 100 mg/L tended to 
enhance lipolysis in rat adipocytes (P = 0.06). Significant lipolytic effects 
were exerted by mangiferin, (-)-4'-O-methylepigallocatechin and maytenfolic acid 
at 100 mg/L (P < 0.01). In conclusion, polyphenolic compounds may be involved in 
the antiobesity effects of SRHW in rats through inhibition of fat metabolizing 
enzymes (PL, LPL and GPDH) and enhanced lipolysis.

DOI: 10.1093/jn/132.7.1819
PMID: 12097653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Indian J Med Res. 1990 Oct;92:383-6.

Effect of feeding black gram (Phaseolus mungo) on serum lipids of normal & 
diabetic guineapigs.

Srivastava A(1), Joshi LD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, M.L.B. Medical College, Jhansi.

When normal and alloxan-induced diabetic guineapigs were given whole seed diet 
of Phaseolus mungo (black gram) for 4 wk, the blood glucose, serum total lipids, 
triglycerides and esterified fraction of cholesterol were significantly lowered, 
while serum phospholipid was unaltered. Total cholesterol/phospholipid ratio 
also decreased in normal as well as diabetic animals indicating the 
antiatherogenic nature of P. mungo.

PMID: 2272678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1990 Apr;34(2):146-8.

Biochemical evaluation of feeding Trichosanthes dioica seeds in normal and mild 
diabetic human subjects in relation to lipid profile.

Sharma G(1), Pandey DN, Pant MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, S. N. Medical College, Agra.

PMID: 2253986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 1994 Feb;31(1):73-6.

Insulin sparing action of a leucocyanidin derivative isolated from Ficus 
bengalensis Linn.

Kumar RV(1), Augusti KT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kerala, Kariavattom, 
Thiruvananthapuram.

PMID: 8076976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Indian J Med Res. 1967 Jul;55(7):733-45.

Anti-diabetic effects of Tinospora cardifolia. I. Effect on fasting blood sugar 
level, glucose tolerance and adrenaline induced hyperglycaemia.

Gupta SS, Verma SC, Garg VP, Rai M.

PMID: 6056285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1989 Apr-Jun;33(2):97-100.

Effects of long term feeding of acetone extract of Momordica charantia (whole 
fruit powder) on alloxan diabetic albino rats.

Singh N(1), Tyagi SD, Agarwal SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Meerut College.

Acetone extract of whole fruit powder of Momordica charantia a given orally 
daily lowered the blood sugar and serum cholesterol levels to normal range after 
15 to 30 days in alloxan diabetic rats. The blood sugar once lowered after 30 
days treatment did not increase even after 15 days of discontinuation of the 
treatment.

PMID: 2777367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1991 Jul;35(3):145-51.

Hypoglycemic and antihyperglycemic effect of leaves of Vinca rosea linn.

Chattopadhyay RR(1), Sarkar SK, Ganguly S, Banerjee RN, Basu TK.

Author information:
(1)Biometry Research Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta.

Oral administration of water fraction of alcoholic extract of leaves of Vinca 
rosea (fam. apocynaeceae) led to marked lowering of blood glucose level in 
normal and streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. The hypoglycemic effect of the 
fraction was comparable with that of tolbutamide.

PMID: 1791053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2001 Jul;65(1):45-50. doi: 
10.1054/plef.2001.0287.

Regular ingestion of opuntia robusta lowers oxidation injury.

Budinsky A(1), Wolfram R, Oguogho A, Efthimiou Y, Stamatopoulos Y, Sinzinger H.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Division of Oncology, University of Vienna, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The influence of opuntia robusta (prickly pear), a traditionally used dietary 
nutrient against diabetes mellitus among the American Indian population, was 
examined in 15 young patients suffering from familial heterozygous isolated 
hypercholesterolemia. Oxidation injury was determined via 8-epi-PGF(2 alpha)in 
plasma, serum and urine. Daily consumption of 250 g broiled edible pulp of 
prickly pear had no influence on body weight and body fat composition. Total 
cholesterol was lowered (P<0.01) as was LDL-cholesterol (P<0.04). No significant 
changes were observed either in triglycerides or in HDL. Prickly pear induced a 
significant decrease in plasma (27.9+/-3.3-->25.6+/-3.2;P<0.03), serum 
(302.0+/-11.4-->283.2+/-14.5;P<0.0003) and urinary 
(355.9+/-18.4-->323.9+/-16;P<0.00002) 8-epi-PGF(2alpha)values. The findings on a 
decrease of 8-epi-PGF(2alpha)were more pronounced in females than in males, the 
highest significance being found in urine, while, in contrast, the effects on 
total- and LDL-cholesterol were more pronounced in males. A prerunning 4 weeks 
period of dietary counseling had no significant effect on either of the 
parameters examined. These findings indicate that the regular ingestion of 
opuntia robusta is able to significantly reduce in-vivo oxidation injury in a 
group of patients suffering from familial hypercholesterolemia. This traditional 
food of the American Indians thus may have a significant cardiovascular benefit.

Copyright 2001 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

DOI: 10.1054/plef.2001.0287
PMID: 11487308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Indian J Med Res. 1967 Jul;55(7):754-63.

Studies on the anti-diabetic effects of Casearia esculenta.

Gupta SS, Verma SC, Garg VP, Khandelwal P.

PMID: 6056287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]