
Ethnobotany, phytochemistry and pharmacology of Stephania rotunda Lour.

Desgrouas C(1), Taudon N(2), Bun SS(3), Baghdikian B(4), Bory S(5), Parzy D(6), 
Ollivier E(7).

Author information:
(1)UMR-MD3, IRBA, Faculté de Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 
Marseille cedex 5, Aix-Marseille Université, France; UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de 
Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean 
Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, Aix-Marseille Université, France. 
Electronic address: camilledesgrouas@gmail.com.
(2)UMR-MD3, IRBA, BP 7391223, Brétigny sur Orges, France. Electronic address: 
nicolas.taudon@gmail.com.
(3)UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de 
Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, 
Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: sok-siya.bun@univ-amu.fr.
(4)UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de 
Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, 
Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: 
beatrice.baghdikian@univ-amu.fr.
(5)Faculté de Pharmacie, Université des Sciences de la Santé, no. 73, Monivong 
Blvd, Daun Penh, Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Electronic address: vireak_sb@yahoo.com.
(6)UMR-MD3, IRBA, Faculté de Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 
Marseille cedex 5, Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: 
daniel.parzy@univ-amu.fr.
(7)UMR-MD3, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie et Ethnopharmacologie, Faculté de 
Pharmacie, 27 boulevard Jean Moulin CS30064 13385 Marseille cedex 5, 
Aix-Marseille Université, France. Electronic address: 
evelyne.ollivier@univ-amu.fr.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Stephania rotunda Lour. (Menispermaceae) is an 
important traditional medicinal plant that is grown in Southeast Asia. The 
stems, leaves, and tubers have been used in the Cambodian, Lao, Indian and 
Vietnamese folk medicine systems for years to treat a wide range of ailments, 
including asthma, headache, fever, and diarrhoea.
AIM OF THE REVIEW: To provide an up-to-date, comprehensive overview and analysis 
of the ethnobotany, phytochemistry, and pharmacology of Stephania rotunda for 
its potential benefits in human health, as well as to assess the scientific 
evidence of traditional use and provide a basis for future research directions.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Peer-reviewed articles on Stephania rotunda were acquired 
via an electronic search of the major scientific databases (Pubmed, Google 
Scholar, and ScienceDirect). Data were collected from scientific journals, 
theses, and books.
RESULTS: The traditional uses of Stephania rotunda were recorded in countries 
throughout Southeast Asia (Cambodia, Vietnam, Laos, and India). Different parts 
of Stephania rotunda were used in traditional medicine to treat about twenty 
health disorders. Phytochemical analyses identified forty alkaloids. The roots 
primarily contain l-tetrahydropalmatine (l-THP), whereas the tubers contain 
cepharanthine and xylopinine. Furthermore, the chemical composition differs from 
one region to another and according to the harvest period. The alkaloids 
exhibited approximately ten different pharmacological activities. The main 
pharmacological activities of Stephania rotunda alkaloids are antiplasmodial, 
anticancer, and immunomodulatory effects. Sinomenine, cepharanthine, and 
l-stepholidine are the most promising components and have been tested in humans. 
The pharmacokinetic parameters have been studied for seven compounds, including 
the three most promising compounds. The toxicity has been evaluated for 
liriodenine, roemerine, cycleanine, l-tetrahydropalmatine, and oxostephanine.
CONCLUSION: Stephania rotunda is traditionally used for the treatment of a wide 
range of ailments. Pharmacological investigations have validated different uses 
of Stephania rotunda in folk medicine. The present review highlights the three 
most promising compounds of Stephania rotunda, which could constitute potential 
leads in various medicinal fields, including malaria and cancer.