Latin American medicine in the 16th century produced the first 
collections of herbs with native plants from the New World. Treatises on popular 
therapies appeared, which included gallenic remedies as well as incorporating 
autochthonous plants. We review the main neurological diseases and their 
treatments described in The Treasure of Medicines for All Illnesses by Gregorio 
Lopez (1542-1596).
DEVELOPMENT: Some critics claim that his work was an enumeration of empirical 
prescriptions, sometimes with a magico-religious influence, which was extended 
in successive reprints. Yet, this manuscript is probably the first treatise on 
therapeutics written by a European in the New World to describe the native 
remedies employed in the treatment of diseases. In the section entitled Remedies 
in alphabetical order the following neurological ailments and appropriate 
remedies to treat them are described: abscess, apoplexy, brain, chilling, cramp, 
gota coral or epilepsy, headache, melancholy, memory, migraine, nerves, palsy, 
paralysis, sciatica, stupor and vertigo. The list of diseases is very complete 
and includes syndromes ranging from fevers, colics and bruises to phthisis, 
scabs or burns. The copy of the manuscript in the Vatican contains a final 
section on Indian medicines, which includes a list of medicinal plants used at 
that time, with the names given in Nahuatl language.
CONCLUSIONS: Headaches, epilepsy and conditions affecting the peripheral nerves 
were the neurological pathologies that were described at greatest length in The 
Treasure of Medicines for All Illnesses, and for which a greater number of 
natural prescriptions were compiled.