Anti-inflammatory and antipyretic activities of the ethanolic extract of Shorea 
robusta Gaertn. f. resin.

Wani TA(1), Chandrashekara HH, Kumar D, Prasad R, Sardar KK, Kumar D, Tandan SK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indian Veterinary Research 
Institute, Izatnagar-243 122 (U.P), India.

Shorea robusta Gaertn. f. (Sal) is one of the most important traditional Indian 
medicinal plants. The resin of the plant has been used in the treatment of 
inflammation in folklore medicine. In the present study, ethanolic extract (70%) 
of S. robusta resin (SRE) was investigated for its anti-inflammatory and 
antipyretic activities. Acute inflammation was produced by carrageenan-induced 
hind paw edema and sub-acute by cotton pellet-induced granuloma in male Wistar 
rats. The antipyretic activity of SRE was studied using Brewer's yeast-induced 
pyrexia in rats. The rats were divided into five groups with five animals in 
each group. Group I was treated with vehicle i.e. 1% v/v Tween-80 and served as 
control. Groups II to IV were treated with three different doses of SRE (30, 100 
and 300 mg/kg orally). Group V was treated with standard drug etoricoxib (10 
mg/kg orally). The anti-inflammatory activity of SRE was assessed by per cent 
reduction in edema volume of carrageenan-induced hind paw edema and by per cent 
decrease in granuloma formation in cotton pellet-induced granuloma test. SRE 
(100 and 300 mg/kg) produced a significant reduction in edema volume and 
decrease in granulation tissue formation in rats. Significant reduction in 
pyrexia was observed at all the dose levels of SRE i.e. 30, 100 and 300 mg/kg. 
The results of the present study demonstrated anti-inflammatory and antipyretic 
activities of S. robusta resin and supported its traditional therapeutic use in 
painful inflammatory conditions and fever.
