The search for new antimalarial drugs from plants used to treat fever and 
malaria or plants ramdomly selected: a review.

Krettli AU(1), Andrade-Neto VF, Brandão MG, Ferrari WM.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Pesquisas René Rachou, Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, MG, 30190-002, 
Brasil. akrettli@cpqrr.fiocruz.br

In this review we discuss the ongoing situation of human malaria in the 
Brazilian Amazon, where it is endemic causing over 610,000 new acute cases 
yearly, a number which is on the increase. This is partly a result of drug 
resistant parasites and new antimalarial drugs are urgently needed. The 
approaches we have used in the search of new drugs during decades are now 
reviewed and include ethnopharmocology, plants randomly selected, extracts or 
isolated substances from plants shown to be active against the blood stage 
parasites in our previous studies. Emphasis is given on the medicinal plant 
Bidens pilosa, proven to be active against the parasite blood stages in tests 
using freshly prepared plant extracts. The anti-sporozoite activity of one plant 
used in the Brazilian endemic area to prevent malaria is also described, the so 
called "Indian beer" (Ampelozizyphus amazonicus, Rhamnaceae). Freshly prepared 
extracts from the roots of this plant were totally inactive against blood stage 
parasites, but active against sporozoites of Plasmodium gallinaceum or the 
primary exoerythrocytic stages reducing tissue parasitism in inoculated 
chickens. This result will be of practical importance if confirmed in mammalian 
malaria. Problems and perspectives in the search for antimalarial drugs are 
discussed as well as the toxicological and clinical trials to validate some of 
the active plants for public health use in Brazil.
