Effect of Indian herbal hypoglycemic agents on antioxidant capacity and trace 
elements content in diabetic rats.

Chandra A(1), Mahdi AA, Singh RK, Mahdi F, Chander R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, King George's Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar 
Pradesh, India.

In the present investigation we report the protective potential of some herbal 
hypoglycemic agents on antioxidant status and levels of metal ions in 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Furthermore, in vitro antioxidant activity 
of the herbs was also evaluated. Induction of diabetes mellitus in rats caused 
an increase in blood lipid peroxide levels that was associated with the reduced 
activity of red blood cell (RBC) antioxidant enzymes--namely, superoxide 
dismutase, catalase, glutathione reductase, and glutathione peroxidase--along 
with depletion of plasma reduced glutathione (GSH) and copper, zinc, iron, 
magnesium, and selenium levels. Oral treatment of diabetic rats with Allium 
sativum, Azadirachta indica, Momordica charantia, and Ocimum sanctum extracts 
(500 mg/kg of body weight) not only lowered the blood glucose level but also 
inhibited the formation of lipid peroxides, reactivated the antioxidant enzymes, 
and restored levels of GSH and metals in the above-mentioned model. The herbal 
extracts (50-500 microg) inhibited the generation of superoxide anions 
(O(2)(-.)) in both enzymatic and nonenzymatic in vitro systems. These 
preparations also inhibited the ferrous-sodium ascorbate-induced formation of 
lipid peroxides in RBCs. The in vivo and in vitro protective effects of the 
above-mentioned herbal drugs were also compared with that of glibenclamide. On 
the basis of our results, we conclude that the above-mentioned herbal plants not 
only possess hypoglycemic properties, but they also decrease oxidative load in 
diabetes mellitus. Therefore, we propose that long-term use of such agents might 
help in the prevention of diabetes-associated complications. However, the 
extrapolation of these results to humans needs further in-depth study.
Effect of Indian herbal hypoglycemic agents on antioxidant capacity and trace 
elements content in diabetic rats.

Chandra A(1), Mahdi AA, Singh RK, Mahdi F, Chander R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, King George's Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar 
Pradesh, India.

In the present investigation we report the protective potential of some herbal 
hypoglycemic agents on antioxidant status and levels of metal ions in 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Furthermore, in vitro antioxidant activity 
of the herbs was also evaluated. Induction of diabetes mellitus in rats caused 
an increase in blood lipid peroxide levels that was associated with the reduced 
activity of red blood cell (RBC) antioxidant enzymes--namely, superoxide 
dismutase, catalase, glutathione reductase, and glutathione peroxidase--along 
with depletion of plasma reduced glutathione (GSH) and copper, zinc, iron, 
magnesium, and selenium levels. Oral treatment of diabetic rats with Allium 
sativum, Azadirachta indica, Momordica charantia, and Ocimum sanctum extracts 
(500 mg/kg of body weight) not only lowered the blood glucose level but also 
inhibited the formation of lipid peroxides, reactivated the antioxidant enzymes, 
and restored levels of GSH and metals in the above-mentioned model. The herbal 
extracts (50-500 microg) inhibited the generation of superoxide anions 
(O(2)(-.)) in both enzymatic and nonenzymatic in vitro systems. These 
preparations also inhibited the ferrous-sodium ascorbate-induced formation of 
lipid peroxides in RBCs. The in vivo and in vitro protective effects of the 
above-mentioned herbal drugs were also compared with that of glibenclamide. On 
the basis of our results, we conclude that the above-mentioned herbal plants not 
only possess hypoglycemic properties, but they also decrease oxidative load in 
diabetes mellitus. Therefore, we propose that long-term use of such agents might 
help in the prevention of diabetes-associated complications. However, the 
extrapolation of these results to humans needs further in-depth study.
