Free radical scavenging, enzyme inhibitory constituents from antidiabetic 
Ayurvedic medicinal plant Hydnocarpus wightiana Blume.

Reddy SV(1), Tiwari AK, Kumar US, Rao RJ, Rao JM.

Author information:
(1)Natural Products Laboratory, Division of Organic Chemistry-I, Indian 
Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad, India.

Hydnocarpus wightiana is advocated in traditional Indian medicine to possess 
strong antidiabetic activity. In the course of identifying bioactive fractions 
from Indian medicinal plants we observed that acetone extract of the seed hulls 
of H. wightiana possess strong free radicals (DPPH and ABTS) scavenging, 
alpha-glucosidase and moderate N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitory 
activities. Further fractionation of the extract led to the isolation of 
hydnocarpin, luteolin and isohydnocarpin in substantial yields. All the 
compounds showed strong ABTS scavenging property. However, only luteolin could 
display strong DPPH scavenging activity. Furthermore, all the three compounds 
also showed varying degrees of alpha-glucosidase and 
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitory activity, luteolin being the 
superior. The kinetics of alpha-glucosidase inhibition by these compounds showed 
that acetone extract inhibits the enzyme in competitive manner however, luteolin 
and isohydnocarpin showed mixed-type inhibition. This is the first report 
assigning hydnocarpin and isohydnocarpin free radical scavenging, 
alpha-glucosidase and N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitory properties and 
luteolin as N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase inhibitor. This study suggests that 
presence of amphiphilic antioxidant molecules along with enzyme inhibitory 
activities in the acetone extract of H. wightiana seed hulls may be responsible 
for the antidiabetic properties as advocated in traditional medicine.