In present study, the effect of alcoholic extract of Momordica charantia, Aegle 
marmelos and Eugenia jambolana was studied on serum glutamic oxaloacetate 
transminase and serum glutamic pyruvate transminase activities and on serum 
urea, total protein and albumin concentrations of streptozotocin diabetic rats. 
Diabetes in rats was induced by single dose of streptozotocin (30 mg/kg i. p.). 
On confirming the diabetes after 48 h of injection, alcoholic extracts of three 
plants were administered orally in doses of 250 mg and 500 mg/kg/d for 30 d. 
Glibenclamide (300 mug/kg/d) was used as a reference drug for comparison. 
Streptozotocin diabetic rats showed a significant increase in serum glutamic 
oxaloacetate transminase and serum glutamic pyruvate transminase activities and 
serum urea concentration but a significant decrease in serum total protein and 
albumin concentrations and albumin/globulin ratio. Oral administration of 
alcoholic extract of Momordica charantia, Aegle marmelos and Eugenia jambolana 
in daily doses of 250 mg and 500 mg/kg for a period of 1 mo produced dose- and 
duration-dependent decrease in serum glutamic oxaloacetate transminase and serum 
glutamic pyruvate transminase activities as well as decrease in serum urea 
concentration and restored the serum total protein and albumin concentration and 
albumin/globulin ratio to a great extent in streptozotocin diabetic rats. The 
beneficial effects of these plants in 500 mg/kg dose in streptozotocin diabetic 
rats were comparable to that of glibenclamide (300 mug/kg), a standard oral 
hypoglycaemic drug used in clinical practice.