Scientific validation of the antidiabetic effects of Syzygium jambolanum DC 
(black plum), a traditional medicinal plant of India.

Baliga MS(1), Fernandes S, Thilakchand KR, D'souza P, Rao S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Research and Development, Father Muller Medical College, 
Kankanady, Mangalore, Karnataka, India. msbaliga@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: In spite of the tremendous progress achieved in medical sciences in 
the last century, the management of diabetes mellitus, a disease as old as 
mankind, is poor. Diabetes is currently the world's largest endocrine disorder, 
and estimates are that it affects almost 5% of the population. Ayurveda, the 
Indian traditional system of medicine, is one of the world's oldest systems to 
have documented the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes.
METHODS: Experimental studies performed in accordance with the modern medicine 
principles have shown that some of the medicinal plants and polyherbal 
preparations made using the plants used in Ayurveda are effective in preventing 
both hyperglycemia and its complications. Syzygium jambolanum (Syn Syzygium 
cumini, Eugenia cumini, Eugenia jambolana), commonly known as black plum and 
originally indigenous to India, is one of the important antidiabetic plants.
RESULTS: Jamun has been used in various complementary and alternative systems of 
medicine and, before the discovery of insulin, was a frontline antidiabetic 
medication even in Europe. The brew prepared by boiling the Jamun seeds in 
boiling water has been used in the various traditional systems of medicine in 
India.
CONCLUSIONS: This review includes the validated antidiabetic effects of Jamun 
and some of its compounds. Emphasis is also placed on addressing the various 
mechanisms of action contributing to the pharmacological effects and the aspects 
that need future investigations for Jamun to be of clinical use.