Plants used by the Cree Nation of Eeyou Istchee (Quebec, Canada) for the 
treatment of diabetes: A novel approach in quantitative ethnobotany.

Leduc C(1), Coonishish J, Haddad P, Cuerrier A.

Author information:
(1)Institut de recherche en biologie végétale, Jardin botanique de Montréal, 
Université de Montréal, 4101 Sherbrooke East, Montréal, Que., Canada H1X 2B2.

In the last decade, the Cree Nation of Eeyou Istchee has witnessed a 150% 
increase in the prevalence of Type II Diabetes (T2D) for people aged over 20 
years. Clinical intervention using conventional therapeutic methods has yielded 
only a limited success within this population. An ethnobotanical survey was 
carried out to identify potentially antidiabetic plant species used within the 
traditional pharmacopoeia of the Cree. Interviews were held with 34 Cree Elders 
using a list of 15 symptoms ranked according to their association to T2D. A 
total of 18 species were cited during the survey, spanning 9 plant families. 
Species were prioritized for pharmacological analysis according to a Syndromic 
Importance Value, based on their frequency of citation by informants and the 
number and specificity of symptoms for which they were used. Correspondence and 
clustering analyses were also performed to determine the specificity of 
association between species and symptoms and the symptom-based correlation 
between species. A data matrix and species ranking order generated from 
Cree-specific literature demonstrates significant similarity and correlation to 
our original matrix and ranking, respectively. This article demonstrates the 
applicability of various underutilized quantitative tools in ethnobotany, while 
taking a convincing preliminary step towards a therapy more in harmony with Cree 
culture and lifestyle.