Evaluation of the antidiabetic potential of selected medicinal plant extracts 
from the Canadian boreal forest used to treat symptoms of diabetes: part II.

Harbilas D(1), Martineau LC, Harris CS, Adeyiwola-Spoor DC, Saleem A, Lambert J, 
Caves D, Johns T, Prentki M, Cuerrier A, Arnason JT, Bennett SA, Haddad PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Université de Montréal, Centre-ville Station, 
Montréal, QC H3C 3J7, Canada.

Among the Cree of northern Quebec, the disproportionately high rate of diabetic 
complications is largely due to the cultural inadequacy of modern therapies for 
type 2 diabetes. To establish culturally adapted antidiabetic treatments, our 
team identified several candidate plant species used by the Cree to treat 
symptoms of diabetes. An initial study focused on 8 species and revealed that 
most possess significant in vitro antidiabetic activity. The purpose of the 
present study was to assess a further 9 species identified through the 
ethnobotanical survey. Crude plant extracts were screened for (i) potentiation 
of basal and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by skeletal muscle cells (C2C12) 
and adipocytes (3T3-L1); (ii) potentiation of glucose-stimulated insulin 
secretion by pancreatic beta cells (betaTC); (iii) potentiation of adipogenesis 
in 3T3-L1 cells; (iv) protection against glucose toxicity and glucose 
deprivation in PC12-AC neuronal precursor cells; and (v) diphenylpicrylhydrazyl 
(DPPH) oxygen free radical scavenging. Four species potentiated basal glucose 
uptake in muscle cells or adipocytes, one species being as potent as metformin. 
Adipogenesis was accelerated by 4 species with a potency roughly half that of 
rosiglitazone. Five species protected PC12-AC cells against glucose toxicity and 
4 protected against glucose deprivation. Five species exhibited antioxidant 
activity comparable to ascorbic acid. However, no species increased insulin 
secretion. The present study revealed that Gaultheria hispidula, Rhododendron 
tomentosum, and Vaccinium vitis-idaea exhibit a promising profile of 
antidiabetic potential and are good candidates for more in-depth evaluation.
