Beneficial effects of Brassica juncea on cognitive functions in rats.

Thakur AK(1), Chatterjee SS, Kumar V.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Research Laboratory, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (Banaras Hindu University), 
Varanasi, India.

CONTEXT. Brassica juncea (BJ; Linnaeus) Czern & Coss (Brassicaceae), commonly 
known as Indian mustard, are enriched in redox-active polyphenols with 
antidiabetic activities. Diverse other health benefits of this edible plant have 
been described in classical Ayurvedic texts.
OBJECTIVE: The reported experiments were designed to assess therapeutic 
potential of a methanol extract of BJ leaves for treatment of cognitive 
disorders associated with diabetes or caused by central cholinergic 
dysfunctions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Elevated plus-maze and active- and passive-avoidance 
tests were used to assess anti-amnesic potentials of BJ (100, 200 and 400 
mg/kg/day, p.o., for 10 days) in alloxan diabetic or scopolamine-challenged 
rats. Treatment effects on brain acetylcholinesterase (AChE), superoxide 
dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) activities were quantified in behavioral 
tested animals.
RESULTS: Anti-amnesic efficacy of all three tested BJ doses against 
scopolamine-induced amnesia was almost equal in all behavioral tests. Such 
efficacy of the extract in diabetic rats was increased always with its 
increasing doses. All treatments of BJ dose dependently decreased the elevated 
level of AChE, and significantly increased the SOD and CAT levels in brain 
homogenates of scopolamine-challenged and diabetic rats. Minimal effective oral 
daily doses of BJ in all tests were 100 mg/kg/day for 10 consecutive days.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Our observation indicates that BJ could be a 
therapeutic option for treatment of cognitive disorders associated with 
diabetes, or caused by cholinergic deficit and brain oxidative status. They also 
indicate that the bioactive constituents or mode of actions involved in observed 
effects of the extract in scopolamine-challenged or diabetic rats are most 
probably not the same.